lip-35: Staking Router v3 (#113)
lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals: LIPS/lip-35.md

Reviewer: Please add Security considerations and Failure modes sections

Reviewer: prob worth adding Glossary

Reviewer: let's add also table of contents as in LIP-27

Author: Thanks, sections added.

Reviewer 2: Very good overall, @mkurayan! Since the doc is pretty long I can suggest shortening some parts of the text (likely AI generated) that does not ad much to the core idea. I noted a few places where the same idea is covered multiple times or there is a text that does not have a valuable meaning. Not a critical requirement tho.

Author: Done. Reduced duplication and added cross-links to improve navigation.

---

> lip: 34

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lip: 35
```

Author: updated thanks

title: Staking Router v3
status: Proposed
author: Maksim Kuraian, KRogLA, Alexander Kolesnikov, Anna Mukharam

> discussions-to:

Reviewer 2: I guess we need a post on RF about the upgrade

Author: Yes, will be done once we merge initial version.

> discussions-to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
discussions-to: TBD
```

Author: updated thanks

created: 2026-04-03

> updated:

Reviewer 2: Fill in pls

Author: updated thanks

---

> # Simple Summary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Staking Router v3

## Simple Summary
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

> Staking Router v3 is a comprehensive upgrade to the Lido protocol's core infrastructure, driven by the Pectra hard fork and EIP-7251 (MaxEB). It replaces the validator-count-based accounting model with direct balance tracking, where `clValidatorsBalance` and `clPendingBalance` supersede the legacy `clBalance` and `clValidators` counters. Rewards distribution shifts from per-validator-count shares to per-module-balance shares, ensuring that operators running high-balance `0x02` validators receive fair compensation proportional to their actual stake contribution.

Reviewer 2: Not sure that `fair compensation` is applicable here

Author: Summary simplified.

> The deposit system transitions from a push model, where Lido orchestrates deposits, to a pull model, where the Staking Router withdraws ETH from the Lido buffer as needed. This decouples deposit logic from the Lido contract and enables two deposit flows: predeposits (32 ETH initial deposits for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys) and top-ups (additional deposits for `0x02` validators up to the 2048 ETH maximum effective balance). Top-ups are secured through on-chain Merkle proof verification of validator state via the new `TopUpGateway` contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The deposit system transitions from a push model, where Lido orchestrates deposits, to a pull model, where the Staking Router withdraws ETH from the Lido buffer as needed. This decouples deposit logic from the Lido contract and enables two deposit flows: predeposits (32 ETH initial deposits for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys) and top-ups (additional deposits for `0x02` validators up to the 2048 ETH maximum effective balance). Top-ups are secured through on-chain Merkle proof verification of validator state on CL via the new `TopUpGateway` contract.
```

Author: Summary simplified.

> A consolidation pipeline is introduced to enable stake migration from Curated Module v1 (CMv1) to Curated Module v2 (CMv2) modules. Operators would initiate migrations via EasyTrack motions, the `ConsolidationMigrator` would validate and route requests through the `ConsolidationBus` (which enforces execution delays and batch limits), and the `ConsolidationGateway` would verify target validator withdrawal credentials on-chain before submitting consolidation requests through the `WithdrawalVault`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A consolidation pipeline is introduced to enable stake migration from Curated Module v1 (CMv1) to Curated Module v2 (CMv2). Operators would create migration pairs (from CMv1 operators to CMv2 operators) and specify `consolidationManager` address via EasyTrack motions, the `ConsolidationMigrator` would validate and route requests through the `ConsolidationBus` (which enforces execution delays and batch limits), and the `ConsolidationGateway` would verify target validator withdrawal credentials on-chain before submitting consolidation requests through the `WithdrawalVault`.
```

The validator exit flow is also updated: the on-chain Validators Exit Bus Oracle (VEBO) introduces a new report format with key index data, enabling key-type-aware sanity checks based on upper-bound total effective balance rather than validator count. The off-chain Validators Exit Oracle (VEO) exit selection logic is updated to support balance-based prioritization, consolidation-aware exits, and operator-weight-based withdrawals for CMv2.

> Finally, a deposit reserve mechanism is introduced to protect a configurable portion of the buffered ether for CL deposits, preventing withdrawal demand from consuming ETH needed for stake rebalancing and initial deposits during the CMv1 to CMv2 migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Simple Summary

Staking Router v3 upgrades Lido's core protocol for EIP-7251 (MaxEB). Validator
accounting moves from per-validator counts to direct balance tracking, rewards
are distributed per-module active balance, and the deposit flow switches from a
push model orchestrated by the Lido contract to a pull model where the Staking
Router withdraws ETH as needed. A new `TopUpGateway` enables top-ups of 0x02
validators up to 2048 ETH, secured by on-chain Merkle-proof verification of
validator state.

A consolidation pipeline enables stake migration from Curated Module v1 to v2,
the validator exit flow (VEBO/VEO) becomes key-type-aware and balance-based,
and a deposit reserve protects a portion of buffered ether for CL deposits
during the migration.
```

Reviewer: I mean simple summary should be simple

Author: Noted, summary updated.

# Motivation

> Staking Router v3 is the foundational infrastructure upgrade that serves as the base layer upon which [LIP-33 (CSM v3 and CM v2)](lip-33.md) is built. It unlocks a more flexible and efficient protocol, both technically and operationally. With these changes, the protocol will be able to reallocate stake between operators and modules via consolidation operations, support new deposits into large validators, naturally streamlining the network, and lay the groundwork for smarter, leaner validator management overall.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Staking Router v3 is the foundational infrastructure upgrade that serves as the base layer upon which [LIP-33 (CSM v3 and CM v2)](lip-33.md) is built. It unlocks a more flexible and efficient protocol, both technically and operationally. With these changes, the protocol will be able to reallocate stake between staking modules via consolidation operations, support new deposits into large validators, naturally streamlining the network, and lay the groundwork for smarter, leaner validator management overall.
```

Author: Yep, thanks!

> **A new, `0x02`-ready, accounting model.** Although already supported by the stVaults architecture, this is a fundamental shift for Lido Core. Currently, the Lido protocol handles critical aspects of validator accounting — deposits, rewards, withdrawals — through a unit-based approach where 1 validator equals 32 ETH. A balance-based accounting model is essential for supporting large validators and consolidations because it allows the protocol to treat validators as flexible balances rather than fixed units, enabling seamless consolidation and validator top-ups. For this to happen, a significant rework of several key components of the on-chain protocol would be required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**A new, `0x02`-ready, accounting model.** Although already supported by the stVaults architecture, this is a fundamental shift for Lido Core. Currently, the Lido protocol handles critical aspects of validator accounting — deposits, rewards, withdrawals — through a unit-based approach where 1 validator equals 32 ETH. A balance-based accounting model is essential for supporting large validators and consolidations because it allows the protocol to treat validators as flexible balances rather than fixed units, enabling seamless consolidation and validator top-ups. For this to happen, a significant rework of several key components of the on-chain protocol is required.
```

Author: Updated, thanks

> **Stake migration from CMv1 to CMv2.** An initial, optimistic and governance-driven implementation would provide a secure and transparent way to operationalize consolidations, ensuring immediate utility for Node Operators. The consolidation process would also make it possible to quickly migrate stake from the old Curated Module v1 to the new Curated Module v2.

Reviewer 2: As I see it now, we use consolidations only for migration and nothing more. But from the text one can assume that there is more to it

Author: Good point, text updated, thanks!

- **Rewards calculation** — the protocol doesn’t know how much ETH is actually working on the Consensus Layer
- **Stake distribution** — allocation between modules is based on validator count, not actual balance
- **Tracking totalPooledEther** — the key metric for stETH rate calculation becomes inaccurate

The solution is to transition from counting validators to direct balance accounting.

### New Accounting Model

Currently, in the `Lido` contract the protocol stores two values: `clValidators` (number of validators on the CL) and `clBalance` (their total balance). The validator count is used to calculate transient balance and perform security checks.

It is proposed to replace `clBalance` and `clValidators` in Lido with `clValidatorsBalance` and `clPendingBalance`. The oracle report structure changes accordingly — instead of total balance, it now delivers balances split by state.

#### Accounting oracle report changes

```diff
- clBalanceGwei
+ clValidatorsBalanceGwei
+ clPendingBalanceGwei
+ stakingModuleIdsWithUpdatedBalance[]
+ validatorBalancesGweiByStakingModule[]
```

Total protocol balance on the CL:

```
totalClBalance = clValidatorsBalance + clPendingBalance
```

> > Note: For the `clValidatorsBalanceGwei` and `clPendingBalanceGwei` calculations, the oracle uses KAPI. When querying KAPI, the oracle verifies that the returned data corresponds to a slot greater than `refSlot`, ensuring that the response includes the most up-to-date state.

Reviewer 2: Why is this note needed?

Author: This is a technical detail, but since several contributors asked about ensuring that the response includes the most up-to-date state, I decided to add it for clarity.

#### Pending Deposits Calculation Algorithm

1. **Data retrieval:** get pending deposits and the active validator set from the Consensus Layer, Lido keys from the Keys API, and Lido withdrawal credentials from the Lido contracts.
2. **Consistency check:** the number of Lido keys returned by the Keys API must be at least equal to the count of deposited validators reported by the Staking Router. If fewer keys are returned, revert.
3. **Find Lido keys awaiting activation:** compare Lido keys against the CL validator set — keys not yet present on the CL are considered _pending_ (deposited on the Execution Layer, not yet activated on the Consensus Layer).
4. **Attribute deposits to pending keys:** walk pending deposits in queue order; for each deposit targeting a Lido pending key:
   - Deposits with an invalid BLS signature are skipped.
   - The first BLS-valid deposit for a key determines the key’s status: if it points to Lido withdrawal credentials, the key is accepted and the deposit is kept; otherwise the key is considered front-run and all of its deposits are discarded.
   - Subsequent deposits to an already-accepted key are added to that key's group.

> 5. **Sum balances:** `clPendingValidatorsBalance` is the sum of deposit amounts across all deposits attributed to accepted pending Lido keys.

Reviewer: is it just `clPendingBalance`? bc I can't see `clPendingValidatorsBalance` used anywhere else tbh

Author: Yep, looks like an old name, corrected, thanks for noticing!

   - `clPendingBalance = transientBalance`

The transient balance becomes the pending balance — semantically, it is the same thing (ETH on the way to activation), but now the oracle will report the actual value instead of a calculated one.

#### StakingRouter Migration

**Before:** modules store only validator counters (`depositedValidatorsCount`, `exitedValidatorsCount`).

**After:** each module stores `validatorsBalanceGwei`.

For each legacy module during migration:

1. Get deposited and exited validator counts
2. Calculate active: `activeCount = depositedValidators - exitedValidators`
3. Calculate initial balance: `validatorBalanceGwei = activeCount × 32 ETH`

The sum of `validatorsBalanceGwei` across all modules is written to the shared `RouterStateAccounting`. The next oracle report will update these values to actual balances from the Consensus Layer.

#### Data Integrity

The first report after migration is correct by construction:

- `principalClBalance` includes the migrated pending balance
- New deposits after migration are visible to the oracle in `clPendingBalance`
- Old transient stake is not counted as rewards

### Sanity Checks

> The list of checks has been updated following the **Pectra hard-fork** and the subsequent expansion of parameters passed to the VEBO and Accounting Oracles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The list of checks has been updated following the **Pectra hard-fork** and the subsequent expansion of parameters passed to the Validator Exit Bus Oracle (VEBO) and Accounting Oracles (AO).
```

To make references below clear

Author: Updated

> [Here you can find full description of changes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YAWLxZk90dkcwCeQkv8xSeWYfVNKGCJmicZpPn-aGR0/edit?tab=t.0)

Reviewer 2: Google docs is not the best format here. Is there a chance to make it an MD file and attach it as an asset?

Author: I think we can try, thanks for pointing that out. 

The reference section at the bottom will be updated as well.

Most of the pre-existing sanityCheck parameters have been recalculated from the number of validators to the amount of ETH. The most significant changes were made to the following parameters:

1. **exitedEthAmountPerDayLimit (57,600 ETH)**
   This has been converted to ETH without changes to the underlying logic, but it now accounts for the specific calculation where the minimum possible validator balance is 16 ETH.

> 2. **consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit (91,800 ETH)**

Reviewer 3: In the OracleReportSanityChecker under the Constructor parameters table, the value for consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit is set to 93375

Reviewer: yeah

Author: updated, thanks.

   This was calculated based on the current state of the network, including deposit queue and a buffer for potential DAO changes over a two-month period (37.3M + 3.2M + 3M).

#### [VEBO] checkMaximumOfAmountEthCalledToExitInReport

This check verifies the maximum amount of ETH that can be sent within a single VEBO report based on the count of different type cases multiplied by their weights. Under this check, we assume the weight of a 0x02-type validator falls within the range of 32 to 2048 ETH and can be adjusted based on risk tolerance. Taking all conditions into account, the current value for `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType02` is set to 2048.

```

> count_of_0x01_keys * maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType01 +

Reviewer 2: `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType01` is not defined anywhere in the doc

Reviewer 2: Still relevant

Reviewer: I guess we can just hardcode it to 32 here

Author: @avsetsin suggested not hardcoding any network-specific constants, because the Japan Ethereum custom network, or another custom network, may have a different configuration.

So, we extracted many such constants into parameters.

Author: The `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType01` defined in parameters section

| Name                                | Value   | Description                                              |
| ----------------------------------- | ------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType01` | `32`    | Per-key weight in ETH for `0x01` keys used in VEBO check |
| `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType02` | `2048`  | Per-key weight in ETH for `0x02` keys used in VEBO check |

Author: And I also added short description above the formula.

- Verifying changes in the total active balance migrated from the pending queue
- Verifying balance changes on a per-module basis.

```python=
aprAndGiftSafetyCap = clValidatorsBalanceGweiPre*annualBalanceIncreaseBPLimit/365

assert clPendingBalanceGweiCurrent <= clPendingBalanceGweiPre + stakeDeposits(t(prev->curr))

activatedGweiAmount = clPendingBalanceGweiPre + stakeDeposits(t(prev->curr)) - clPendingBalanceGweiCurrent
assert activatedGweiAmount <= appearedEthAmountPerDayLimit

activatedGweiAmountWithGap = activatedGweiAmount + aprAndGiftSafetyCap

if clValidatorsBalanceGweiCurrent > clValidatorsBalanceGweiPre:
    assert clValidatorsBalanceGweiCurrent - clValidatorsBalanceGweiPre <= activatedGweiAmountWithGap

totalActivatedInClByModules = 0
for i, stBalance in enumerate(validatorBalancesGweiByStakingModule(current)):
    _moduleIncrease = stBalance - validatorBalancesGweiByStakingModule(prev)[i]
    if _moduleIncrease > 0:
        totalActivatedInClByModules += _moduleIncrease

assert totalActivatedInClByModules <= activatedGweiAmountWithGap + consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit
```

#### [AO] checkNumExitedValidatorsByStakingModule

> This check has been updated to align with the introduction of the consolidation process. Now, the maximum amount of ETH exited at once cannot exceed double the sum of exited and consolidated ETH.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is not clear to me

Author: @VasilyevAA

Reviewer 4: More specifically, the logic here is key based rather than ETH based. In the worst-case scenario, validator balances can first decrease to 16 ETH, after which some of those validators can be both consolidated and exited within the same accounting window. As a result, when expressing the limit in terms of validator keys, the bound must account for both flows simultaneously, which is equivalent to counting each validator with an actual balance of 16 ETH, and therefore, when simplifying the formula, results in doubling the sum of the consolidation limit and the exit limit

Maybe change last sentence like(?):
`Now, when expressed in validator keys, the maximum bound must account for both consolidation and exit flows simultaneously, which under the assumption that each validator is counted with an effective balance of 16 ETH results in a limit equal to twice the sum of the consolidation limit and the exit limit.`

Reviewer 2: Let's apply the change

Author: Text in LIP simplified, added link to the new doc with full technical details.

> The necessity for doubling is due to the worst-case scenario where validators participating in these processes have the minimum balance of 16 ETH. The size of 0x02-type validators is set to the minimum possible value because, otherwise, actual recorded withdrawals could falsely trigger a revert.

Reviewer 2: The assumption about validator balances of 16 ETH is unreasonable for the Lido protocol

Author: This checks were designed by analytics team to cover most extreme scenarios 
@VasilyevAA, @MaxMerkulovMol could you please share more details

Reviewer 4: @dgusakov Here we account for the inactivity leak scenario. In that case, isn’t it possible that a large number of validators could be penalized by significant amounts?

Reviewer 2: We will almost certainly eject them before. But let's keep

```

> count_of_0x01_keys * 32 + count_of_0x02_keys * 32

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(count_of_0x01_keys + count_of_0x02_keys) * 32
```

Any reason why we use 32 ETH for 0x02 here but 2048 ETH above?

Author: This check was intentionally kept count-based. The exited validator count is not used for accounting purposes and is only relevant for legacy modules, where each validator has a fixed 32 ETH balance.

The check ensures that the number of exited validators does not exceed the maximum possible number of exits. It may be reasonable to remove this check entirely in future releases once the NOR and SDVT modules are sunset.

<=
(exitedEthAmountPerDayLimit + consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit)*2

OR

(count_of_0x01_keys + count_of_0x02_keys) * 16
<= exitedEthAmountPerDayLimit + consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit
```

### Legacy API

Currently, external services use `Lido.getBeaconStat()`, which returns `depositedValidators`, `beaconValidators`, and `beaconBalance`.

However, `beaconValidators` would no longer reflect the actual consensus layer (CL) state and would always be equal to `depositedValidators`.

It is proposed to **mark `getBeaconStat` as deprecated**.

For new integrations, `getBalanceStats()` is recommended, as it reflects the current accounting model and provides more detailed information about the protocol state.

## Consolidation

![Consolidation flow](./assets/lip-35/consolidation_flow.png)

> It is suggested that node operators initiate the consolidation process via an EasyTrack motion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is suggested that the first step in the consolidation process is an EasyTrack motion to set consolidation parameters.
```

Author: Nice! Updated, thanks.

Each proposal defines one source operator and multiple target operators, forming multiple source→target mappings that share the same source. The provided Consolidation Manager will be authorized to execute consolidations from the specified source operator to any of the listed target operators.

Currently, only consolidation from operators in the CMv1 module to operators in the CMv2 module will be allowed. Under the hood, Easy Track validation verifies that the source–target operator pair is registered in the CMv2 meta operators registry, which indicates that the pair is allowed under the migration plan.

A single node operator in the CMv1 module may consolidate into multiple operators in the CMv2 module, and such configurations can be submitted within a single EasyTrack motion.

### Consolidation Migrator

The **Consolidation Migrator** contract validates stake consolidation (migration) requests from a source operator in one module to a target operator in another module.

It ensures that:

- Consolidation requests are submitted by the authorized **Consolidation Manager address**
- Consolidations are permitted only for explicitly allowed **(sourceOperator → targetOperator)** pairs

> - Each validator key involved in a consolidation is marked as `used`

Reviewer 2: Just a note that CMv2 will not have this feature and the key index should be compared to the `totalDepositedKeys` counter for the given Node Operator

Author: Yes this is how it implemented in code for both source and target module key index compared against `totalDepositedKeys`.

I will update description to make it more clear.

Author: Updated

The **source module ID** and **target module ID** are provided at deployment time in the implementation contract and are immutable thereafter.

To manage the list of allowed consolidation pairs (source → target operators), it is proposed to add three methods:

`allowPair` — allows consolidation from a source operator to a target operator for a specified consolidation manager address. This method will be called via an EasyTrack motion upon enactment.

> `disallowPair` — disallows consolidation from a source operator to a target operator. This method may be called to correct an incorrectly allowed pair, update the consolidation manager address, or stop consolidation for operational reasons.

Reviewer 2: Can we also add a note about who is allowed to call this method?

Author: All parameters, including `DISALLOW_PAIR_ROLE`, are described in the **"Proposed Params and Roles"** section at the bottom of the document.

But I agree it would be good to mention this here as well to keep it consistent with the `allowPair` method description, where it is explicitly stated who is permitted to call the method.

The text will be updated, thanks!

 *      This is safe as long as the first returned value really is `bytes pubkeys` in that position.
 */
interface IUnifiedStakingModule {
  function getSigningKeys(
    uint256 nodeOperatorId,
    uint256 startIndex,
    uint256 keysCount
  ) external view returns (bytes memory);

  function getNodeOperatorSummary(
    uint256 _nodeOperatorId
  )
    external
    view
    returns (
      uint256 targetLimitMode,
      uint256 targetValidatorsCount,
      uint256 stuckValidatorsCount,
      uint256 refundedValidatorsCount,
      uint256 stuckPenaltyEndTimestamp,
      uint256 totalExitedValidators,
      uint256 totalDepositedValidators,
      uint256 depositableValidatorsCount
    );
}
```

To validate whether a target key has already been used (deposited), the `getNodeOperatorSummary` method from `IStakingModule` will be used to obtain the total number of deposited validators (`key index < totalDepositedValidators`).

### Consolidation Message Bus

The Message Bus decouples consolidation request submission from execution.

The `ConsolidationBus` allows configuring:

- batch size limit via `setBatchSize` (maximum number of requests per batch)

> - target validator group limit via `setMaxGroupsInBatch` (maximum number of target validator groups per batch)

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I got what you mean here

Author: Each target key requires an associated proof. Therefore, the number of target keys must not exceed maxGroupsInBatch. Otherwise, a batch could be submitted with more keys than can be proven at execution time, making it impossible to execute.

```
    struct ConsolidationGroup {
        bytes[] sourcePubkeys;
        bytes targetPubkey;
    }

    function addConsolidationRequests(ConsolidationGroup[] groups) {...}
```

- execution delay via `setExecutionDelay` (time between batch submission and execution)

Authorized actors can submit consolidation requests in batches via the `addConsolidationRequests` method. The contract enforces batch size and target validator group limits, and stores batch hashes along with submission timestamps for deferred processing.

> After the execution delay has passed, a permissionless executor can execute a batch via `executeConsolidation` by submitting the original batch that was previously added via `addConsolidationRequests`, along with the required fee and `ValidatorWitness` proofs for each target validator. The Consolidation Bus verifies that the submitted batch hash matches the stored hash value for the original consolidation and that the required execution delay has elapsed. If all checks pass, it forwards the consolidation requests, WC proofs, and fee to the Consolidation Gateway, after which the batch is deleted from the Consolidation Bus.

Reviewer 2: It is worth mentioning here that the proof for the target validator is required only once.

Author: Noted, I slightly update text to make request structure more clear. Thanks.

  // Remover API (REMOVE_ROLE)
  function removeBatches(bytes32[] calldata batchHashes) external;

  // Publisher API (PUBLISH_ROLE)
  // 1. Verify caller has PUBLISH_ROLE.
  // 2. Verify total batch size and number of groups do not exceed limits.
  // 3. Validate all pubkey lengths are 48 bytes and no source equals its target.
  // 4. Store batch hash and BatchInfo (publisher, addedAt timestamp).
  // 5. Emit RequestsAdded event.
  function addConsolidationRequests(ConsolidationGroup[] calldata groups) external;

  // Executor API
  // 1. Verify the batch was added and not executed or removed.
  // 2. Verify the execution delay has passed since the batch was added.
  // 3. Forward the batch to the ConsolidationGateway with ValidatorWitness proofs.
  // 4. Delete the batch from the pending queue.
  // 5. Emit RequestsExecuted event.
  function executeConsolidation(IConsolidationGateway.ConsolidationWitnessGroup[] calldata groups) external payable;
}
```

#### Execution delay

It is proposed that consolidation request execution can only be processed after an execution delay interval, which can be configured via the `setExecutionDelay` method.

> This execution delay ensures that honest Council members have sufficient time to pause the DSM and thereby block the execution of new consolidation requests (the Consolidation Gateway checks that the DSM is not paused) in case keys with invalid withdrawal credentials were deposited.

Reviewer 2: So we will not pause the gateway itself?

Author: We can also pause the Consolidation Gateway. This is a separate action that can be used in various scenarios.

In the case of key frontrunning, the honest council will automatically pause the DSM contract. Once the DSM is paused, the Consolidation Gateway checks its status and does not process requests until the pause is lifted (this is briefly described in the Consolidation Gateway section).

Reviewer: Maybe it's a bit outdated

Using the Withdrawal Vault for this purpose would not be advisable. The Withdrawal Vault manages multiple independent concerns, including protocol withdrawals and triggerable exit requests. Treating it as a pausable unit would prevent selectively pausing consolidation requests while continuing to accept triggerable withdrawal requests, which is operationally undesirable.

To address this, the `ConsolidationGateway` is introduced as a pausable contract (see [PausableUntil.sol](https://github.com/lidofinance/core/blob/master/contracts/0.8.9/utils/PausableUntil.sol)) designed to handle consolidation requests in a controlled and secure manner. It:

- **Authorizes** only permitted callers to submit requests
- **Enforces request limits** to prevent overload
- **Ensures DSM deposits are not paused**
- **Ensures Lido is not stopped and bunker mode is not active**
- **Verifies CL proofs** of target validator withdrawal credentials (via `CLProofVerifier`)
- **Validates ETH fees**, ensuring they meet the minimum consolidation cost
- **Transfers the required fee** to the `WithdrawalVault`
- **Refunds any excess ETH** to a specified recipient

> - **Can be paused** via the `GateSeal` mechanism for emergency control

Reviewer 2: Since we already have CB, maybe we want to replace `GateSeal` with CB in the whole doc?

Author: Yes, updated, thanks.

   *
   * @notice Reverts if:
   *         - Caller is not ConsolidationGateway.
   *         - Arrays are empty, malformed, or of unequal length.
   *         - Invalid total withdrawal fee value is provided.
   */
  function addConsolidationRequests(bytes[] calldata sourcePubkeys, bytes[] calldata targetPubkeys) external payable;

  /**
   * @dev Returns the current EIP-7251 consolidation fee per request.
   */
  function getConsolidationRequestFee() external view returns (uint256);
}
```

## Deposits

To fully support 0x02 keys and enable flexible stake rebalancing across operators, it is proposed to introduce **top-up deposits**. With this enhancement, the system will support two types of deposit flows:

- **Predeposits**: deposits of exactly 32 ETH to new validators for 0x01 and 0x02 types of keys
- **Top-ups**: deposits for 0x02-type active validators intended to reach the max effective balance (2048 ETH)

Following this change, two types of deposit-handling modules may exist:

- Modules with **0x01 keys** that accept only 32 ETH predeposits
- Modules with **0x02 keys** that accept predeposits and top-ups up to 2,048 ETH

> To maintain system simplicity, each module must support **only one key type** for deposits: either 0x01 or 0x02 — not both.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To maintain system simplicity, **each module must support only one key type** for deposits: either 0x01 or 0x02 — not both.
```

Author: Updated.

It is proposed that the deposit flow rely on validator balances rather than the number of keys, and that it support keys with both credential types: 0x01 and 0x02.

### Depositable ETH Pull Model

The Lido contract is currently tightly coupled to the deposit process. Lido must determine—via the Staking Router—how much of the available ETH should be allocated to each module, and then pass both ETH and the required deposit data into the Staking Router’s `deposit` method. This creates unnecessary complexity in the deposit flow.

![Deposit push model](./assets/lip-35/deposit_push_model.png)

> It is proposed to decouple deposit logic from the Lido contract by shifting the deposit flow from a **push** model to a **pull** model. Under this approach, the Staking Router would withdraw ETH from the Lido buffer as needed to execute deposits.

Reviewer 2: That's a great change! Nothing to add here. Great job! 👏

![Deposit pull model](./assets/lip-35/deposit_pull_model.png)

This change would allow:

- Keeping the Lido contract simpler, without deposit-related functions, reducing the number of responsibilities it carries.
- Simplifying the Staking Router logic by making it the single component responsible for executing deposits.
- Implementing all new deposit functionality outside of the Lido contract, in a newer Solidity version.

#### Lido

The Lido contract is responsible for supplying the ETH required for validator top-ups. To support the new ETH pull model during the deposit process, it is proposed to add a new `withdrawDepositableEther` method to the Lido contract.

> Only the Staking Router will be permitted to pull ETH from Lido. The `withdrawDepositableEther` method will verify that the requested ETH amount is available for deposits and will then call `StakingRouter.receiveDepositableEther`, attaching the corresponding ETH.

Reviewer 2: I suggest thinking about more explicit name for `withdrawDepositableEther`, like `withdrawDepositableEtherForDeposits`

Author: “Depositable ether” already denotes ETH that is available for deposit. 

IMHO in this context, I am not sure that `withdrawDepositableEtherForDeposits` adds meaningful clarity over `withdrawDepositableEther`.

}
```

As part of the pull model transition, the following deposit-related members are proposed to be removed from the Lido contract:

- `deposit(uint256 _maxDepositsCount, uint256 _stakingModuleId, bytes _depositCalldata)` — the old push-model deposit method.
- The `IStakingRouter.getStakingModuleMaxDepositsCount()` interface usage — Lido would no longer need to determine per-module deposit allocation, as the Staking Router would handle this independently under the pull model.

#### Staking Router

To support switching the deposit flow from a push model to a pull model, it is proposed to introduce a new `receiveDepositableEther` method for receiving ETH from Lido. The `receiveDepositableEther` method can receive ETH only from Lido.

```solidity
interface IStakingRouter {
  /**
   * @notice A payable function for depositable ether acquisition. Can be called only by `Lido`.
   */
  function receiveDepositableEther() external payable;
}
```

It is proposed that deposit flows adopt the new pull-based ETH model. These flows are covered in detail in the following Deposits sections.

### Predeposits flow description

> A predeposit refers to the initial 32 ETH deposit made to a validator to activate it. For withdrawal credentials type `0x01`, 32 ETH is the maximum, and the predeposit is the only deposit. For withdrawal credentials type `0x02`, 32 ETH is intended to activate the validator, with the remaining balance deposited later if applicable.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can mention here why we are making an initial deposit of 32 ETH and not 1 ETH. Just a short note will serve the purpose.

Author: Good point, I simplified text and added note to the text about 32 ETH deposit.

**Note.** A 32 ETH deposit is suggested because it is the minimum effective balance needed for validator activation. Deposits below this threshold do not activate a validator and therefore do not accrue rewards until the total deposited amount reaches at least 32 ETH.

**Note**: The details for each component (Lido, Staking Router, and modules) are described in the relevant sections below. This section outlines the overall predeposits workflow steps.

![Predeposits flow](./assets/lip-35/predeposits_flow.png)

1. **The Depositor Bot** collects guardian signatures and initiates the deposit transaction.
2. **The DepositSecurityModule** verifies the guardian signatures and checks the deposit distance. If everything is valid, it calls `StakingRouter.deposit`.
3. **The StakingRouter** performs deposits. As part of this process, the Staking Router:
   - Calculates how much of Lido’s available ETH should be allocated to each staking module.
   - Obtains deposit keys from the staking module.
   - Pulls from Lido the total amount of ETH required to execute deposits for the received keys.
   - Submits a 32 ETH deposit for each key.

### Top-ups flow description

> As in the initial predeposit flow, the Staking Router will deposit 32 ETH for both 0x01 and 0x02 keys. To support reaching the maximum effective balance for 0x02 keys, it is proposed to add Merkle-proof–based top-ups via a separate flow. This adds security by reducing trust assumptions and avoids complicating the validator-creation logic. Top-ups are allowed only for modules that support creation of 0x02 keys.

Reviewer 2: Here and in the other parts of the doc
```suggestion
As in the initial predeposit flow, the Staking Router will deposit 32 ETH for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys. To support reaching the maximum effective balance for `0x02` keys, it is proposed to add Merkle-proof–based top-ups via a separate flow. This adds security by reducing trust assumptions and avoids complicating the validator-creation logic. Top-ups are allowed only for modules that support creation of `0x02` keys.
```

Author: Sure, I will update thought the whole lip for consistency.

**Note:** The details for each component (Depositor Bot, Top-up Gateway, Lido, Staking Router, and modules) are described in the relevant sections below. This section outlines the overall top-up workflow steps.

![Top-up flow](./assets/lip-35/topup_flow.png)

> 1. The Depositor Bot selects validators according to the algorithm described in the _Top-up Keys Selection_ section and calls `TopUpGateway.topUp`, providing staking module data (module ID, key indices, operator IDs), Merkle proofs, and validator consensus-layer (CL) data.

Reviewer 2: We can use anchors to link sections that we refer to

Author: Updated.

3. The `StakingRouter` executes the top-ups:
   - The Staking Router verifies that top-ups are allowed for the module (i.e., the module uses withdrawal credentials of type `0x02`).
   - It determines how much ETH can be allocated to the module.
   - It calls `allocateDeposits` on the staking module with the module’s maximum deposit amount and the keys’ data, and receives the exact top-up amount for each key. The sum of all top-up amounts must be less than or equal to the module’s maximum deposit amount.
   - The Staking Router pulls from Lido the total ETH amount equal to the sum of all top-up amounts returned by the staking module.
   - The Staking Router then executes the top-ups for each key.
   - After all keys have been deposited, the Staking Router performs a sanity check to ensure that the entire amount of ETH requested from Lido has been deposited.

### Depositor Bot

For modules that support 0x02 keys, the system should maintain a sufficient number of eligible validators for top-ups so that a significant portion of the ETH in the buffer can be used immediately, without waiting until the validator becomes active.

> The Depositor Bot is proposed to be responsible for maintaining an appropriate balance between predeposits and top-ups, with predeposits taking priority over top-ups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Depositor Bot is proposed to be responsible for maintaining an appropriate balance between predeposits and top-ups, **with predeposits taking priority over top-ups**.
```

Author: Thanks, depositor bot description updated.

> The Depositor Bot selects validators differently for CMv2 and the 0x02 version of the CSM module.

Reviewer 2: Worth linking CM and CSM LIP here

Reviewer 2: Ah, it is covered below. Nice. Then add a note that the actual process is described below.

- If there are no keys available for predeposit but there are validators eligible for top-ups in modules, the bot:
  - Selects validators based on the module-specific algorithm described in the section below
  - Builds Merkle proofs
  - Calls `TopUpGateway.topUp` (a new contract that verifies proofs and calls `topUp` on the Staking Router) with the staking module data (module IDs, key indices, operator IDs), proofs, and validator CL data

#### Top-up key selection for CMv2

For **CMv2**, the Depositor Bot operates on a per-operator basis:

1. The Depositor Bot computes `depositAmount = min(buffered ether, module allocation)`.
2. It calls `getDepositsAllocation(uint256 depositAmount)` on the module to determine how much to allocate to each operator from the computed `depositAmount`.
3. Across this list of operators, the Depositor Bot chooses the oldest validators and checks that:
   - the validator has not exceeded a **2045.75 ETH** balance (this constant is discussed in the _Top-Up Limit Calculation_ section) balance (actual + pending);
   - the validator is active;

>    - the validator is not marked for exit (`exitEpoch != FAR_FUTURE`);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - the validator has not initiated exit on CL (`exitEpoch != FAR_FUTURE`);
```

Author: Yep, updated.

   - the validator is not slashed;

>    - the validator is not involved in migration;

Reviewer 2: Looks like this is the same as below, but with fewer details. Remove?

Author: Yes, good catch! Removed.

   - the validator is not a consolidation target (when source validator is Lido WC);
4. For the selected validators, the Depositor Bot builds Merkle proofs:

>    - full validator data;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Proof of the `Validator` container on CL;
```

Reviewer 2: And below pls

Author: Agree, updated!

  uint64 slot; // header slot
  uint64 proposerIndex; // header proposer
}

struct ValidatorWitness {
  // Merkle path: Validator[i] → … → state_root → beacon_block_root
  bytes32[] proofValidator;
  // Validator container fields (except WC)
  bytes pubkey;
  uint64 effectiveBalance;
  bool slashed;
  uint64 activationEligibilityEpoch;
  uint64 activationEpoch;
  uint64 exitEpoch;
  uint64 withdrawableEpoch;
}

interface ITopUpGateway {
  /// @notice Allows topping up Lido Core validators.
  /// @dev Access-controlled in the implementation (role-based).
  function topUp(TopUpData calldata topUps) external;

  function getLastTopUpTimestamp() external view returns (uint256);
  function getMaxValidatorsPerTopUp() external view returns (uint256);
  function getMinBlockDistance() external view returns (uint256);
  function getMaxRootAge() external view returns (uint256);

  function setMaxValidatorsPerTopUp(uint256 newValue) external;
  function setMinBlockDistance(uint256 newValue) external;
  function setMaxRootAge(uint256 newValue) external;

  function canTopUp(uint256 stakingModuleId) external view returns (bool);
}
```

#### Proof building rules

> The slot is taken from a selected beacon header, and the timestamp is taken from the execution block that stored the root of this header in the EIP-4788 contract. On-chain verification checks that this timestamp resolves, via EIP-4788, to the corresponding beacon root, and that the Merkle path includes a header node with exactly this `(slot, proposer)`.

Reviewer 2: Links to EIPs. Here and in all doc

Author: Done 👍

The slot used in the proof must not be older than 5 minutes relative to the current timestamp. This requirement enforces that proofs are generated for **recent** headers, which reduces the probability that the validator has exited between proof construction and top-up execution, while providing sufficient time for an off-chain agent to assemble the proof and the remaining inputs required for the top-up.

Reorganizations are not treated as a separate risk: a proof built on a reorged branch simply fails because the EIP-4788 anchor root is no longer available and the Merkle verification reverts.

> TopUpGateway enforces that the **slot must be newer than the previously accepted slot**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TopUpGateway enforces that the **new slot must be newer than the previously accepted slot**.
```

Author: We actually made it more strict, text updated:
TopUpGateway enforces that the block timestamp used in the proof is newer than the timestamp of the last top-up.

To perform a top-up for a given validator, an off-chain bot must provide:

> - Consensus-layer validator fields:

Reviewer 2: This is basically a `Validator` container on CL. We can just link consensus-specs here

Author: Except, withdrawal credentials. We take them from Staking Router.
Text updated, thanks!

  - `pubkey`
  - `effectiveBalance`
  - `activationEligibilityEpoch`
  - `activationEpoch`
  - `slashed`
  - `exitEpoch`
  - `withdrawableEpoch`

> The Merkle proof for the validator must establish that the hash-tree-root of this validator container (with the expected withdrawal credentials and other fields) is a leaf of the beacon state tree whose root is the state root committed by the proved beacon header. In other words, the validator record is proven to belong to the state corresponding to the header whose root is exposed via EIP-4788 for the supplied timestamp.

Reviewer 2: Add a note that this approach drastically increases the security of the proof since  faking the whole struct is way harder than a single field

Author: We use single field (withdrawal credentials) verification in consolidation flow. The proof of single WC field should be secure enough, please correct me if i wrong.

#### Validator State Validation

After verifying the validator state via proofs, the `TopUpGateway` validates the following:

- **Withdrawal credentials** should match the expected `0x02`-format Lido withdrawal credentials.
- **Activation status:** the validator should be activated before the proved header slot:
  - `activationEpoch` should be less than the epoch corresponding to the proved slot.

If any of these checks fail, `TopUpGateway` reverts.

> **Note.** If `exitEpoch != FAR_FUTURE_EPOCH` (i.e., an exit has been scheduled) or the validator is slashed, the top-up limit is set to `0` (see the next section). Therefore, there is no requirement to restrict inputs to validators with an unknown exit epoch or an unslashed status.

Reviewer 2: Also slashed?

Author: Text updated, thanks.

If a validator is slashed, marked for exit, or has already exited, the allowed top-up amount is set to zero:

```
Top-up limit = 0
```

If the validator is eligible for deposits, the top-up limit is calculated as:

```
Top-up limit = targetBalanceGwei − effective_balance − pendingBalanceGwei

Where targetBalanceGwei is a configurable parameter (initialized to MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE − TOP_UP_SAFETY_MARGIN = 2046.75 ETH).

Since Top-up limit ≥ minTopUpGwei, we have:

targetBalanceGwei − (effective_balance + pendingBalanceGwei) ≥ minTopUpGwei
⟺ effective_balance + pendingBalanceGwei ≤ targetBalanceGwei − minTopUpGwei

If effective_balance + pendingBalanceGwei > targetBalanceGwei − minTopUpGwei, then Top-up limit = 0.
```

For simplicity, it was suggested to use `effective_balance` instead of `active_balance` in the top-up limit calculation. A validator’s `active_balance` may differ from its `effective_balance` by no more than the hysteresis thresholds defined in the consensus layer:

- `DOWNWARD_THRESHOLD = 0.25 ETH`
- `UPWARD_THRESHOLD = 1.25 ETH`

> To avoid over-depositing a validator, `TOP_UP_SAFETY_MARGIN` is introduced. It is therefore proposed to set `TOP_UP_SAFETY_MARGIN` to **1.25 ETH**.

Reviewer 2: We should also mention the STEP here and think about how the limit works with our 2 ETH step.

Author: Good catch, this text obsolete. 
The minimum top-up value is also defined as 2 ETH in parameters section, so there should be no discrepancy. 
I will update text.

Reviewer 2: Still relevant

Author: Initially, I updated the text above with the `minTopUpGwei` (2 ETH) calculation, but it appears that the explanation was not clear enough. Since there was still confusion, I reworked this section, removed the complicated formula, and added a simpler explanation of the top-up limit calculation.

There is no conflict with the CMv2 2 ETH step. The full explanation of the top-up calculation is provided a few lines above.

This guarantees that, under the current hysteresis thresholds, topping up a validator to the limit will result in a balance between `MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE − 1.5 ETH` and `MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE` (for simplicity, excluding any balance changes during the deposit queue wait time). Under current conditions, it is expected to take up to 12 days for the validator to earn 1.5 ETH and reach `MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE`.

Revisiting the upper bound on `effective_balance + pending_deposits` with `TOP_UP_SAFETY_MARGIN = 1.25 ETH`, we get:

```
effective_balance + pending_deposits ≤ MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE − TOP_UP_SAFETY_MARGIN − 1 = 2045.75
```

#### Pause

If a validator is frontrun, it is not risky for top-ups, since the withdrawal credentials are verified on-chain.

Top-ups should not be executed if the protocol is in bunker mode or paused, or if the module is not active.

If it is necessary to stop predeposits/top-ups, for example during a hard fork, the Depositor Bot will be temporarily stopped.

> |                             | Predeposits | Top-up |

Reviewer 2: It is not clear how the table corresponds to the text above. Make sure that what you describe above and in the table below is coherent

Author: Yep, it looks cumbersome, table removed, text simplified. Thanks!!

If pending deposits exist in the queue but are not supplied to the TopUpGateway, a validator may temporarily receive more ETH than necessary. Any excess will eventually be skimmed to the validator’s withdrawal credentials.

Any occurrence of an excessive top-up will be detected by existing monitoring and treated as an incident: the authorized top-up actors (e.g., the Depositor Bot) will be paused and promptly adjusted. Due to the automatic skimming mechanism, the impact of such events is expected to be minor.

**2. Unnecessary top-ups to soon-to-be-consolidated validators**

The authorized Depositor Bot is responsible for ensuring that a validator is not involved in consolidation — either as a source or a target. In particular, it must verify that the validator is not referenced in `pending_consolidations` as a target, and that no related consolidation requests are currently being processed by the Lido consolidation workflow (waiting in the `ConsolidationBus` contract) or are waiting in the EL consolidation queue.

> Any instance of an unnecessary top-up will be detected by monitoring and treated as an incident: the authorized top-up actors (e.g., the Depositor Bot) will be adjusted. Due to the automatic skimming mechanism, the impact of such events is expected to be minor.

Reviewer 2: This is a copy of the paragraph above. Consider moving it to the bottom of the section and have it written only once

Author: fixed, thanks

> **3. Increased imbalance between validator cohorts**

Reviewer 2: There is also an additional risk of top-ups being evenly distributed between partially full validators. This can impact protocol APR. Hence, we should mention that the depositor bot will always try to top-up validators that already received some top-ups.  I admit that this can be achieved by always choosing the oldest once. However, when the migration is done, we might have some validators that were not full after consolidations. Despite them not being the oldest, we need to top them up first. 

This is more a future note tho

Author: >_when the migration is done, we might have some validators that were not full after consolidations._ 

This is mostly a consolidation risks. IMHO until consolidation finished bot should not take balances into account because it might interfere with consolidation process. But in next release when we introduce partial withdrawal  for sure we need adjust bot logic, but changes will be relatively small.

I will add note about bot work in this section. Thanks!

For modules that support 0x02 keys, the Depositor Bot should maintain a sufficient number of top-up–eligible validators so that a meaningful portion of the ETH buffer can be utilized immediately, without waiting until the validator becomes active.

If the Depositor Bot incorrectly prioritizes top-ups over initial deposits and exhausts the current set of top-up–eligible validators, the system may temporarily have no eligible validators available and will be forced to wait for new validators to be activated.

If monitoring detects that the number of top-up–eligible keys has fallen below the required threshold, an alert will be triggered and the Depositor Bot will be promptly adjusted. The impact of such events is expected to be minor.

> ### Staking Router

Reviewer 2: I have a feeling that this section partially duplicates info already mentioned above

Author: Yes, but for consistency I described all the logic behind the deposit and topUp methods here. It was useful during development and review, and for understanding the overall logic of these methods. If you don’t mind, I would prefer to keep this description.

It is proposed to update the existing `deposit` methods to support the ETH pull model and enable initial 32 ETH deposits to 0x02 withdrawal credentials. The updated `deposit` method would:

> 1. **Calculate module allocation.** The amount of ETH that can be deposited into a module is divided by 32 (for both module types) to determine the maximum number of deposits (`maxDepositsCount`). This value is additionally capped by `maxDepositsCountPerBlock`, which can be configured individually for each module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Calculate module allocation.** The amount of ETH that can be deposited into a module is divided by 32 (for both module types) to determine the maximum number of initial deposits (`maxDepositsCount`). This value is additionally capped by `maxDepositsCountPerBlock`, which can be configured individually for each module.
```

Author: updated thanks

2. **Obtain keys for the initial deposit.** After determining the deposit limit, the Staking Router calls the existing `IStakingModule(stakingModuleAddress).obtainDepositData(maxDepositsCount, depositCalldata)` method to fetch public keys and signatures. The `obtainDepositData` call may return up to `maxDepositsCount` keys.
3. **Pull the required ETH from Lido.** The Staking Router pulls from Lido the total amount of ETH required to execute the deposits for the keys obtained from the module. The required amount is calculated as: `number of obtained keys × 32 ETH`.
4. **Perform 32 ETH deposits.** The Staking Router performs a 32 ETH deposit for each key, using the appropriate withdrawal credentials based on `withdrawalCredentialsType`:

>    - `0x02` + withdrawal credentials contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `0x02` + withdrawal credentials contract address
```

Author: Updated.

### Validators Exit Bus Oracle (VEBO)

Currently, the `ValidatorsExitBusOracle.sol` contract performs a sanity check on the number of exiting validators included in a VEBO report, under the assumption that every validator uses a 0x01-type key with a maximum effective balance of 32 ETH.

After the transition to MaxEB, the validator count–based approach in VEBO is no longer sufficient: a validator’s effective balance may range from 32 ETH up to 2048 ETH, so the number of validators alone does not provide a reliable upper bound on the withdrawn amount.

To ensure a reliable upper bound on the withdrawn amount, it is proposed to:

- Extend the VEBO report format to include the pubkey, module ID, operator ID, and key index, allowing the key type (0x01 / 0x02) to be determined on-chain.
- Update the sanity checker to validate the **upper-bound total effective balance** requested to exit based on the key type (0x01 with a MaxEB of 32 ETH or 0x02 with a MaxEB of 2048 ETH), rather than the raw validator count.

> ![VEBO report format](./assets/lip-35/vebo_report_format.png)

Reviewer 2: Move below the next header?

Author: No, but the picture needed to be renamed. Thanks for noticing.

#### Sanity checker

The proposed update is to validate the **upper-bound total effective balance** requested to exit rather than the raw validator count. In `OracleReportSanityChecker.sol`:

- The existing `maxValidatorExitRequestsPerReport` limit will be replaced with a balance-based limit, `maxBalanceExitRequestedPerReportInEth`.
- To preserve the current safety threshold, `maxBalanceExitRequestedPerReportInEth` should be set to **19,200 ETH**, equivalent to the previous cap of `600 validators × 32 ETH`.

Under the new logic, each VEBO report will be validated as follows:

- For modules with **0x01-type keys**, multiply the number of validators in the report that belong to this module by **32 ETH**.
- For modules with **0x02-type keys**, multiply the number of validators in the report that belong to this module by **2048 ETH**.
- Sum the resulting values across all modules and compare the total against the configured **ETH-denominated sanity-check limit**.

This approach establishes a conservative upper bound on withdrawal volume per report and ensures that VEBO cannot trigger an excessively large withdrawal in a single submission, thereby reducing protocol risk.

> ### Validators Exit Oracle (VEO)

Reviewer 2: VEO or VEBO or VEB? I'm a bit lost here

Author: Yeah, the naming is confusing:

* **VEO** — Validators Exit Oracle (off-chain oracle)
* **VEBO** — Validators Exit Bus Oracle (on-chain contract)
* **VEB** — Validators Exit Bus (also an on-chain contract, but not separate from VEBO). In my opinion, this is technical debt from a previous TW release, which makes things more complicated.

I will update the header so it’s clear that this section is about the off-chain oracle implementation.

However, if deposit reserve is introduced, part of the buffer may be used for deposits that bypass withdrawals.

Therefore, VEO should take deposit reserve into account when calculating the amount of ETH that needs to be withdrawn.

#### Consolidation

During stake migration from CMv1 to CMv2, and in other cases after the migration is finished:

- Source consolidation validators **should not** be selected for exit by VEO; otherwise, exit requests would be wasted on validators that are already about to be consolidated.
- Target validators **can** be selected by VEO, but VEO should take into account the balances of their associated consolidation source validators, since those balances will be consolidated into the target validator.

It is expected that VEBO would inspect the `PendingConsolidation` queue to differentiate exit requests from consolidation requests when calculating the required ETH withdrawal amount.

#### CMv2 Meta Registry and CMv1 Operator Balances

The process of migrating stake from the CMv1 module to the CMv2 module may occur unevenly: some operators migrate their stake earlier than others.

> In the current implementation, when validators are exited from the CMv1 module, the Validator Exit Oracle (VEO) uses a fair distribution algorithm: exits are requested from operators with the largest stake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current implementation, when validators are exited from the CMv1 module, the Validators Exit Oracle (VEO) uses a fair distribution algorithm: exits are requested from operators with the largest stake.
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

Given the uneven migration, it is necessary to correctly account for the aggregate operator balances across the CMv1 and CMv2 modules in order to properly determine from which operators stake exits should be initiated.

> The [Meta Registry](https://hackmd.io/@lido/cm-v2-spec#Meta-Operators-Registry) stores information about the explicit relationship between CMv1 module operators and their corresponding operators in the CMv2 module. As a result, when selecting validators to exit from the CMv1 module, the VEO will be able to take into account the amount of stake already migrated by operators to the CMv2 module.

Reviewer 2: Update the link to LIP

Author: Done, thanks

#### Operator weight in the CSMv2 module

For withdrawals, VEO must be able to determine from which modules and from which operators stake should be withdrawn.

At the **module level**, VEO continues to rely on the existing exit share limit.

At the **operator level**, withdrawals depend on the stake allocation strategy used by the module. Currently, two types of withdrawal strategies are in use:

- **Operator-weight–based distribution** (CMv2)

> - **Even distribution** (CMv1, CSM, SDVT)

Reviewer 2: CSM is not even tho. For CSM the oldest validators from the largest operators should be exited first. I guess it is already so. Just pointing that CSM is not even))

Author: Yes, this is how it works, and this is exactly what I meant. I will update the wording to make it clear. Thanks!

The existing even-distribution strategy does not require any additional data. However, to support operator-weight–based withdrawals, it is proposed to add a `getOperatorWeights` method to the module interface. This method returns operator weights from the CMv2 on-chain allocation strategy.

```solidity
interface ITargetAllocation {
  function getOperatorWeights(uint256[] calldata operatorIds) external view returns (uint256[] memory operatorWeights);
}
```

> To determine which validators to request for exit, VEO builds a sorted list of exitable validators based on the predicates described in the table below. It then selects entries from this list until the withdrawal queue (WQ) demand is covered by the exiting validators and future rewards, or until the per-report limit is reached.

Reviewer 2: VEBO should also account for the external stake

Reviewer 2: Still relevant

Author: The interaction with Meta Registry described covered in previous section  `Operator weight in the CSMv2 module`

Could you please clarify what do you mean by external stake?

- Efficiently rebalance stake between modules; it took SDVT over a year and a half to reach its target share. A future possible CSM share limit increase up to 10% might require significant time.
- Ensure that there is always enough ETH for initial 32 ETH deposits to 0x02-type keys in the CMv2 module to support stake migration from the CMv1 to the CMv2 module via consolidation.

To solve these challenges, it is proposed to add a deposit reserve mechanism to protect a portion of the protocol's buffered ether for CL deposits, regardless of withdrawal demand.

### Deposit Reserve

Under current conditions, cycling arbitrage and vampire attacks via withdrawals can result in submitted ether being withdrawn before it is ever deposited. This situation limits the ability to allocate stake to new modules and node operators.

To ensure that there is always enough ETH for stake rebalancing and initial 32 ETH deposits to 0x02-type keys in the CMv2 module during the migration process, it is proposed to reserve a portion of the protocol's buffered ether for CL deposits, protecting it from being consumed by withdrawal demand.

#### Proposed solution

> 1. Allow the DAO or a delegated entity to set a deposits reserve target (`depositsReserveTarget`) — the amount of buffered ether to protect for CL deposits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Allow the DAO or a delegated entity to set a deposits reserve target (`depositsReserveTarget`) — the amount of buffered ether to protect for CL deposits between AO reports.
```

Author: Yep, text adjusted.

### Lido

New implementation; state migration is performed via `finalizeUpgrade_v4()` which reads from storage and takes no arguments. The Lido app implementation has no parameters that change between versions.

### LidoLocator

New implementation. Two new addresses (`consolidationGateway`, `topUpGateway`) are added to the locator config;

| Name                   | Value                                 | Description                    |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `consolidationGateway` | New `ConsolidationGateway` deployment | non-proxy ConsolidationGateway |
| `topUpGateway`         | New `TopUpGateway` proxy              | TopUpGateway proxy             |

### StakingRouter

Two new immutables (`MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_WC_TYPE_01`, `MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE_WC_TYPE_02`) are added. Per-module state migration and OpenZeppelin AccessControl role re-import are performed in `finalizeUpgrade_v4()` (no parameters).

| Role                               | Assignee                 |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------ |

> | `STAKING_MODULE_SHARE_MANAGE_ROLE` | Module Shares Easy Track |

Reviewer 2: You can not give permission to a factory. You can assign the role to `EVMScriptExecutor`

Reviewer 2: Still relevant

Author: Updated, thanks

| Name                             | Value                                        | Description                              |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `_triggerableWithdrawalsGateway` | New TriggerableWithdrawalsGateway deployment | TriggerableWithdrawalsGateway            |
| `_consolidationGateway`          | New `ConsolidationGateway` deployment        | ConsolidationGateway                     |
| `_withdrawalRequest`             | `0x00000961Ef480Eb55e80D19ad83579A64c007002` | EIP-7002 withdrawal request predeploy    |
| `_consolidationRequest`          | `0x0000BBdDc7CE488642fb579F8B00f3a590007251` | EIP-7251 consolidation request predeploy |

### DepositSecurityModule

New non-proxy contract deployed at upgrade; its address is written to `LidoLocator`. Ownership is transferred to Agent; guardians and quorum are re-imported from the previous DSM.

### OracleReportSanityChecker

New non-proxy contract deployed at upgrade; replaces the previous sanity checker in `LidoLocator`.

| Role                 | Assignee |
| -------------------- | -------- |

> | `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` | Agent    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` | Aragon Agent    |
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

Constructor parameters:

| Name                                | Value   | Description                                            |
| ----------------------------------- | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType01` | `32`    | Per-key weight in ETH for 0x01 keys used in VEBO check |
| `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType02` | `2048`  | Per-key weight in ETH for 0x02 keys used in VEBO check |
| `maxCLBalanceDecreaseBP`            | `360`   | Max CL balance decrease over 36-day window (BP, 3.6%)  |

> | `consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit` | `93375` | Max ETH consolidated per day                           |

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to set it to a multiple of 32 ETH?

Author: It describe the current code implementation, suggest to keep i without changes.

| `exitedValidatorEthAmountLimit`     | `32`    | Per-validator ETH amount used in exit reporting        |

### ConsolidationGateway

New non-proxy contract.

| Role                             | Assignee                                     |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE`             | Agent                                        |

> | `PAUSE_ROLE`                     | ConsolidationGateway GateSeal, ResealManager |

Reviewer 2: Update all GateSeals to CB pls

| `RESUME_ROLE`                    | ResealManager                                |
| `ADD_CONSOLIDATION_REQUEST_ROLE` | ConsolidationBus                             |

> | `EXIT_LIMIT_MANAGER_ROLE`        | Not assigned by default                      |

Reviewer 2: Exit limit on ConsolidationGateway?

| `frameDurationInSec`            | `36`                                                                 | Frame duration used for limit refill (seconds)                |
| `gIFirstValidatorPrev`          | `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000096000000000028` | Generalized index for first validator before fork pivot       |
| `gIFirstValidatorCurr`          | `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000096000000000028` | Generalized index for first validator after fork pivot        |
| `pivotSlot`                     | `0`                                                                  | Slot at which the active generalized index switches           |

### ConsolidationGateway GateSeal

New `GateSeal` instance guarding `ConsolidationGateway`.

| Name               | Value                    | Description                                  |
| ------------------ | ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------- |
| `sealingCommittee` | Dedicated multisig (TBD) | Multisig permitted to trigger the seal       |

> | `sealDuration`     | `1209600` (14 days)      | Duration a seal keeps the gateway paused     |

Reviewer 3: I’m not sure, but it seems that CircuitBreaker defines its own pause period, which we can’t override: pauseDuration = 21 days.

https://www.notion.so/CircuitBreaker-Gate-Seal-v2-337bf633d0c981ca846fcb99dcf5d71a?source=copy_link#343bf633d0c98022bf38f0c075c5fae4

| `sealables`        | `[ConsolidationGateway]` | Contracts that can be paused by the seal     |
| `expiryTimestamp`  | deploy time + 365 days   | Gate seal becomes inert after this timestamp |

### ConsolidationBus

New contract behind `OssifiableProxy`.

| Role                 | Assignee              |
| -------------------- | --------------------- |
| Proxy admin          | Agent                 |
| `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` | Agent                 |
| `PUBLISH_ROLE`       | ConsolidationMigrator |
| `REMOVE_ROLE`        | Agent                 |

> | `MANAGE_ROLE`        | Agent                 |

Reviewer 2: Do we need to assign these roles from the get-go?

Author: Only because it was implemented in a code such way. 

```
    function initialize(
        address admin,
        uint256 initialBatchSize,
        uint256 initialMaxGroupsInBatch,
        uint256 initialExecutionDelay
    ) external initializer {
        if (admin == address(0)) revert AdminCannotBeZero();

        _grantRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, admin);
        _grantRole(MANAGE_ROLE, admin);
        _grantRole(REMOVE_ROLE, admin);

        _setBatchSize(initialBatchSize);
        _setMaxGroupsInBatch(initialMaxGroupsInBatch);
        _setExecutionDelay(initialExecutionDelay);
    }
```

| `_minTopUpGwei`          | `1000000000` (1 ETH)               | Minimum top-up amount; smaller calculated top-ups are skipped                             |

### TriggerableWithdrawalGateway

Parameter upgrade for `TriggerableWithdrawalGateway`:
| Name | Value | Description |
| ----------------------- | -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `maxExitRequestsLimit` | 250 | Maximum number of triggerable exit requests in the limit bucket |
| `exitsPerFrame` | 1 | Number of exit requests restored to the bucket per frame |
| `frameDurationInSec` | 240 | Duration of each refill frame, in seconds |

### EasyTrack

Two new factories are proposed to be registered; EasyTrack admin roles would remain unchanged.

| Factory                          | Permission target                  |
| -------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| `UpdateStakingModuleShareLimits` | `StakingRouter.updateModuleShares` |
| `AllowConsolidationPair`         | `ConsolidationMigrator.allowPair`  |

> ## Useful Links

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## References
```

Author: Yep, updated. Thanks!

---
lip: 35
title: Staking Router v3
status: Proposed

> author: Maksim Kuraian, KRogLA, Alexander Kolesnikov, Anna Mukharram

Reviewer 2: Add GH usernames?

Author: Good idea, added!

> discussions-to: TBD

Reviewer 2: To be updated before merge

Author: updated, thanks

created: 2026-04-03

> updated: 2026-04-20

Reviewer 2: Update both or just the last one

Author: Since we haven’t merged it yet, I’ll set both to the current date.

---

# LIP-35. Staking Router v3

## Table of Contents

- [LIP-35. Staking Router v3](#lip-35-staking-router-v3)

>   - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

Reviewer 2: Not sure that we need this self-ref here

I also feel that we can move all stuff 1 level up and remove top-level mention of the LIP itself

Reviewer 2: Still relevant

    - [StakingRouter](#stakingrouter)
    - [AccountingOracle](#accountingoracle)
    - [ValidatorsExitBusOracle](#validatorsexitbusoracle)
    - [WithdrawalVault](#withdrawalvault)
    - [DepositSecurityModule](#depositsecuritymodule)
    - [OracleReportSanityChecker](#oraclereportsanitychecker)
    - [ConsolidationGateway](#consolidationgateway)
    - [ConsolidationGateway CircuitBreaker registration](#consolidationgateway-circuitbreaker-registration)
    - [ConsolidationBus](#consolidationbus)
    - [ConsolidationMigrator](#consolidationmigrator)
    - [TopUpGateway](#topupgateway-1)
    - [TopUpGateway CircuitBreaker registration](#topupgateway-circuitbreaker-registration)
    - [TriggerableWithdrawalGateway](#triggerablewithdrawalgateway)
    - [EasyTrack](#easytrack)
  - [Security Considerations](#security-considerations)
    - [On-chain proofs as the trust anchor for top-ups and consolidations](#on-chain-proofs-as-the-trust-anchor-for-top-ups-and-consolidations)
    - [Authorized Depositor Bot for Top-Ups](#authorized-depositor-bot-for-top-ups)
    - [Deposit reserve and withdrawal demand](#deposit-reserve-and-withdrawal-demand)
  - [References](#references)

> ## Simple Summary

Reviewer 2: The summary is incomplete. We mention some parts, but omit others. Missing stuff that I see:
- Oracle's changes
- Module share management

Author: I used to have a full description, but EM suggested simplifying it and keeping it short and clear. I mentioned that the validator exit flow becomes key-type-aware and balance-based, and I will add a few words about module share management.

Author: Done.

> A dedicated Easy Track factory streamlines module share management within pre-defined bounds.

**Stake migration from CMv1 to CMv2.** The consolidation process would provide a secure and transparent way to quickly migrate stake from the old Curated Module v1 to the new Curated Module v2 with minimal stake inefficiency.

**Deposit reserve for reliable stake rebalancing.** Historically, stake rebalancing between modules through new deposits and withdrawals has been slow and unreliable — SDVT took over 1.5 years to reach its target share. A deposit reserve mechanism guarantees ETH availability for migration deposits and new module onboarding, regardless of withdrawal demand.

> # Specification

Reviewer 2: This is H1, and the main name is also H1. Not sure if it is correct

Author: Why not? There is quite a lot of text, so I used H1 for the Specification section to better distinguish all subsections with H2, H3, H4, and H5.

I can try changing the header structure if you have a strong opinion against the current formatting.

Reviewer: It's just linting rules and practices suggest it for better structure, e.g. https://github.com/markdownlint/markdownlint/issues/14

## Glossary

> - **MaxEB** — Maximum Effective Balance. Introduced by [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251), it raises a validator's effective balance ceiling from 32 ETH up to 2048 ETH for validators with `0x02` withdrawal credentials.

Reviewer 2: MaxEB was not introduced in 7251. If was only raised there

Author: Valid point, text refined. Thanks.

- **WC** — Withdrawal Credentials. The 32-byte field on a validator that determines where its stake exits to and which key type it uses. All Lido core validators use credentials pointing to the `WithdrawalVault` contract.
- **`0x01` / `0x02` keys** — validator key types, distinguished by withdrawal credentials prefix. `0x01` keys are capped at 32 ETH effective balance; `0x02` keys support effective balance up to 2048 ETH (MaxEB) and allow top-ups and consolidations.
- **Predeposit** — the minimal deposit (32 ETH) required to activate a validator. Required for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys.
- **Top-up** — an additional deposit to an already-activated `0x02` validator, raising its balance toward the 2048 ETH cap.
- **Consolidation** — an [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) operation that merges a source validator's balance into a target `0x02` validator.

> - **CMv1 / CMv2** — Curated Module v1 (the existing curated module with 0x01 withdrawal credentials) and Curated Module v2 (the new curated module with 0x02 withdrawal credentials).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **CMv1 / CMv2** — Curated Module v1 (the existing curated module with 0x01 withdrawal credentials, also known as Node Operators registry, or simply Curated Module) and Curated Module v2 (the new curated module supporting 0x02 withdrawal credentials only).
```

Author: Applied, thanks!

- **CSM** — Community Staking Module, Lido's permissionless staking module.

> - **SDVT** — Simple DVT module, the staking module that runs distributed validators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **SDVT** — Simple DVT module, the staking module that runs distributed validators. Uses the same code base as CMv1.
```

Author: Applied, thanks.

- **Deposit Reserve** — a portion of Lido's buffered ether protected from withdrawal demand and reserved for CL deposits, ensuring stake rebalancing and migration deposits are not blocked.
- **AO** — Accounting Oracle. The oracle that reports validator balances, rewards, and other accounting data to the protocol.
- **VEBO** — Validators Exit Bus Oracle. The oracle that publishes validator exit requests.
- **DSM** — Deposit Security Module. The contract and a distributed off-chain service that gates Lido initial 32 ETH deposit that activates a validator and can be paused by Council guardians.
- **TWG** — TriggerableWithdrawalGateway. The contract that submits [EIP-7002](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7002) triggerable withdrawal requests on behalf of the protocol.

## Accounting

### The 32 ETH Problem

> Before the Pectra upgrade, every Ethereum validator had a fixed effective balance — 32 ETH. This allowed Lido to use a simple accounting model: it was enough to count the number of validators and multiply by 32 to get the total stake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before the [Pectra](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7600) upgrade, every Ethereum validator had a fixed maximum effective balance of 32 ETH. This allowed Lido to use a simple accounting model: it was enough to count the number of validators and multiply by 32 to get the total stake.
```

Author: Nice! Applied, thanks!

> [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) (MaxEB) changed the rules. Now, a validator’s effective balance can range from 32 to 2048 ETH. A validator with 2048 ETH generates 64 times more rewards than a validator with 32 ETH, but the old system treated them equally.

Reviewer 2: 7251 is not called MaxEB

> [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) (MaxEB) changed the rules. Now, a validator’s effective balance can range from 32 to 2048 ETH. A validator with 2048 ETH generates 64 times more rewards than a validator with 32 ETH, but the old system treated them equally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) introduced the new type of validator withdrawal credentials - `0x02` with `MaxEB = 2048 ETH`. For these validators, an effective balance can range from 32 to 2048 ETH. A validator with 2048 ETH generates 64 times more rewards than a validator with 32 ETH, but the old accounting system in the Lido protocol treated them equally.
```

Author: Applied, thanks.

- **Rewards calculation** — the protocol doesn’t know how much ETH is actually working on the Consensus Layer
- **Stake distribution** — allocation between modules is based on validator count, not actual balance
- **Tracking `totalPooledEther`** — the key metric for stETH rate calculation becomes inaccurate

The solution is to transition from counting validators to direct balance accounting.

### New Accounting Model

Currently, in the `Lido` contract the protocol stores two values: `clValidators` (number of validators on the CL) and `clBalance` (their total balance). The validator count is used to calculate transient balance and perform security checks.

It is proposed to replace `clBalance` and `clValidators` in Lido with `clValidatorsBalance` and `clPendingBalance`. The oracle report structure changes accordingly — instead of total balance, it now delivers balances split by state.

#### Accounting oracle report changes

```diff
- clBalanceGwei
+ clValidatorsBalanceGwei
+ clPendingBalanceGwei
+ stakingModuleIdsWithUpdatedBalance[]
+ validatorBalancesGweiByStakingModule[]
```

Total protocol balance on the CL:

```
totalClBalance = clValidatorsBalance + clPendingBalance
```

> > Note: For the `clValidatorsBalanceGwei` and `clPendingBalanceGwei` calculations, the oracle uses KAPI. When querying KAPI, the oracle verifies that the returned data corresponds to a slot greater than `refSlot`, ensuring that the response includes the most up-to-date state.

Reviewer 2: Add a link to KApi repo

Author: Added, thanks.

#### CL Validators Balance Calculation Algorithm

> 1. **Data retrieval:** get the active validator set (with balances) from the Consensus Layer, and the list of Lido keys from the Keys API.

Reviewer 2: Use either KAPI or Keys API across the doc. Not both

Author: Yep, will use Keys API across the doc., thanks!

2. **Consistency check:** the number of Lido keys returned by the Keys API must be at least equal to the count of deposited validators reported by the Staking Router. If fewer keys are returned, revert.
3. **Match keys to validators:** for every Lido key, look it up in the CL validator set:
   - If the key is present on the CL, it belongs to an active Lido validator and is included in the report.

>    - If the key is not yet on the CL, it is pending (deposited on the Execution Layer, not yet activated on the Consensus Layer) and is skipped here — its balance is handled separately by the pending-balance calculation.

Reviewer 2: Can it also be not deposited?

Author: Keys that had not been deposited yet were skipped.

4. **Sum balances:** `clValidatorsBalance` is the sum of balances across all matched active Lido validators.

#### Pending Deposits Calculation Algorithm

1. **Data retrieval:** get pending deposits and the active validator set from the Consensus Layer, Lido keys from the Keys API, and Lido withdrawal credentials from the Lido contracts.
2. **Consistency check:** the number of Lido keys returned by the Keys API must be at least equal to the count of deposited validators reported by the Staking Router. If fewer keys are returned, revert.
3. **Find Lido keys awaiting activation:** compare Lido keys against the CL validator set — keys not yet present on the CL are considered _pending_ (deposited on the Execution Layer, not yet activated on the Consensus Layer).

> 4. **Attribute deposits to pending keys:** walk pending deposits in queue order; for each deposit targeting a Lido pending key:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Attribute deposits to pending keys:** walk over pending deposits in queue order; for each deposit targeting a Lido pending key:
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

   - Deposits with an invalid BLS signature are skipped.
   - The first BLS-valid deposit for a key determines the key’s status: if it points to Lido withdrawal credentials, the key is accepted and the deposit is kept; otherwise the key is considered front-run and all of its deposits are discarded.
   - Subsequent deposits to an already-accepted key are added to that key's group.
5. **Sum balances:** `clPendingBalance` is the sum of deposit amounts across all deposits attributed to accepted pending Lido keys.

### From Transient to Pending

**Currently**, there is a “transient balance” — a virtual value compensating for the delay between sending a deposit and its appearance on the Consensus Layer:

```
transientBalance = (depositedValidators - clValidators) × 32 ETH
```

This construct was necessary because a deposit could “temporary disappear” between the Execution Layer and the Consensus Layer for several hours or even days. The oracle didn’t see these funds, but the protocol had to account for them in `totalPooledEther`.

> **Proposed:** Pectra ([EIP-6110](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6110)) eliminates this problem. Deposits from the Execution Layer enter the Consensus Layer pending queue in the same block:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Proposed:** [EIP-6110](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6110), introduced in Pectra Hard Fork,  eliminates this problem. Deposits from the Execution Layer enter the Consensus Layer pending queue in the same block:
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

> “Validator deposits list supplied in a block is obtained by parsing deposit contract log events emitted by each deposit transaction included in a given block.” — [EIP-6110](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6110)

> The oracle always sees the complete picture: active validators in `clValidatorsBalance`, pending deposits in `clPendingBalance`. Transient balance is no longer needed — this simplifies the system and eliminates a potential source of discrepancies between the actual CL state and protocol data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The oracle always sees the complete picture: active validators in `clValidatorsBalance`, pending deposits in `clPendingBalance`. Transient balance is no longer needed — this simplifies the system and eliminates a potential source of discrepancies between the actual CL state and protocol data on EL.
```

Also, add CL and EL to the glossary.

Author: Applied, thanks.

```diff
+ buffered -= amount
+ depositedSinceLastReport += amount
+ depositedForCurrentReport += amount
```

Where:

- `depositedSinceLastReport` — total deposits since the last oracle report reference slot across all frames (includes deposits made after the current reporting frame)
- `depositedForCurrentReport` — deposits that occurred between the last report reference slot and the current frame's reference slot (i.e., deposits the oracle should have observed; excludes deposits made after the current reporting frame)

```
                                                               NOW
                     ┌─ depositedSinceLastReport ────────────┐ ↓
                     │─ depositedForCurrentReport ─┐         │
      │○○○○○○○○○○○○○○│○●●○○R○○○●○○●○│○○●●●○○●○●○○○○│○○●●○○●○○●○○○○│
      ┆         lastReport-↑       currentRefSlot-↑└────⁠┬────┘
      ┆              ┆ currentReportFrame-↓        ┆    └depositedNextReport
      ⁠║   frame X    ⁠║   frame X+1  ⁠║   frame X+2  ⁠║   frame X+3  ⁠║

       R - report transaction slot
       ● - slot with deposits
       ○ - empty slot
       ⁠║ - frame refSlot

> ```

Reviewer 2: What do frames mean here? I read the pic as we had a missed report since for me frames are oracle frames

Author: These are the oracle frames.

And yes, this example shows the most generous case, where the last report was missed. Even in this case, we still correctly track both `depositedSinceLastReport` and `depositedForCurrentReport`.

  function getBalanceStats()
    external
    view
    returns (
      uint256 clValidatorsBalanceAtLastReport,
      uint256 clPendingBalanceAtLastReport,
      uint256 depositedSinceLastReport,
      uint256 depositedForCurrentReport
    );
}
```

With this transition, the following deposit-related members are no longer needed and are proposed to be removed from Lido:

- `unsafeChangeDepositedValidators(uint256 _newDepositedValidators)` and the associated `UNSAFE_CHANGE_DEPOSITED_VALIDATORS_ROLE` — no longer required due to the transition to balance-based deposit tracking

### Rewards Calculation

**Currently**, the principal balance (total balance of validators in the previous report and deposits made since then) is calculated taking into account new validators:

```diff
- principalClBalance = prev.clBalance + (report.clValidators - prev.clValidators) × 32 ETH
- clRewards = _report.clBalance + update.withdrawalsVaultTransfer - update.principalClBalance
```

The formula compensates for deposits “in transit” but is tied to the 32 ETH assumption.

> **Proposed:** the principal is taken directly from storage:

Reviewer 2: What about EL Vault?

Author: The EL Vault is a plain EL contract that accumulates fees, the oracle reads its balance and the protocol just pulls elRewardsVaultTransfer ETH into the buffer.

- clBalance
- clValidators
```

**Current state:** a single packed storage slot containing `clBalance` and `clValidators`.

**Target state:** a single packed storage slot containing `clValidatorsBalance` and `clPendingBalance`.

**Migration procedure:**

1. Read legacy state:
   - `clBalance`
   - `clValidators`
   - `depositedValidators`
2. Compute the transient balance as
   `transientBalance = (depositedValidators − clValidators) × 32 ETH`.
3. Populate the new state:
   - `clValidatorsBalance = clBalance`
   - `clPendingBalance = transientBalance`

The transient balance becomes the pending balance — semantically, it is the same thing (ETH on the way to activation), but now the oracle will report the actual value instead of a calculated one.

#### StakingRouter Migration

**Before:** modules store only validator counters (`depositedValidatorsCount`, `exitedValidatorsCount`).

**After:** each module stores `validatorsBalanceGwei`.

For each legacy module during migration:

1. Get deposited and exited validator counts
2. Calculate active: `activeCount = depositedValidators - exitedValidators`
3. Calculate initial balance: `validatorBalanceGwei = activeCount × 32 ETH`

> The sum of `validatorsBalanceGwei` across all modules is written to the shared `RouterStateAccounting`. The next oracle report will update these values to actual balances from the Consensus Layer.

Reviewer 2: So it might decrease?

Author: Yes, validatorsBalanceGwei can decrease after the first oracle report following migration.

#### Data Integrity

The first report after migration is correct by construction:

- `principalClBalance` includes the migrated pending balance
- New deposits after migration are visible to the oracle in `clPendingBalance`
- Old transient stake is not counted as rewards

### Sanity Checks

The list of checks has been updated following the **Pectra hard-fork** and the subsequent expansion of parameters passed to the Validator Exit Bus Oracle (VEBO) and Accounting Oracles (AO).

> [Here you can find full description of changes](https://hackmd.io/@lido/HJ0AC5D0Ze)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Here you can find full description of changes](https://hackmd.io/@lido/HJ0AC5D0Ze).
```

#### AO CL Balance Decrease

This check prevents an unexpectedly large drop in CL validator balance. It compares the actual balance decrease over up to 36 days with the maximum decrease that could happen naturally from penalties and slashing. The current allowed decrease is capped at about **3.6%** of CL validator balance over the checked period. 

##### First 36 Days Problem

> After a new staking router release, the oracle may not yet have a full 36 days of historical data. In that case, the check uses all available data and gradually expands the window day by day until it reaches 36 days. This still limits how much negative rebase can be hidden over time. 

Reviewer 2: Why "may"? It will def not have this data

Reviewer 2: We need a better explanation of how inaccurate this check would be over the first 36 days

Author: Added more description, thanks.

## Consolidation

![Consolidation flow](./assets/lip-35/consolidation_flow.png)

It is suggested that the first step in the consolidation process is an EasyTrack motion to set consolidation parameters.

Operators will use EasyTrack to specify a **source/target operator pair** (CMv1 → CMv2), along with a **Consolidation Manager address**—the address that will be granted permission to submit consolidation requests for consolidating validators from the source operator to the target operator. Once the motion is enacted, stake transfers from a CMv1 operator entity to its corresponding CMv2 entity are permitted, allowing the operator to submit consolidation requests to the Migrator contract.

Once consolidation is allowed, the operator submits key indices to the Consolidation Migrator contract, which verifies that the keys are in use (deposited). The Consolidation Migrator, via dedicated modules, retrieves the corresponding pubkeys from the provided key indices. The consolidation requests are then sent to the Consolidation Bus, which stores the hash of the pubkey batch received from the Migrator.

> After the required execution delay has passed, a permissionless executor submits the same batch along with target validator withdrawal credentials (WC) proofs and the required fee. The Consolidation Bus verifies that the submitted batch hash matches the stored value. If it does, the Bus forwards the consolidation request, WC proofs, and fee to the Consolidation Gateway.

Reviewer 2: Can we add a reasoning for the delay here?

Reviewer 2: Found it. Pls link the section here

Author: Linked.

- Consolidation requests are submitted by the authorized **Consolidation Manager address**
- Consolidations are permitted only for explicitly allowed **(sourceOperator → targetOperator)** pairs
- Each validator key involved in a consolidation has been deposited by Lido.

If all checks pass, the **Consolidation Migrator** sends the resolved public keys (grouped by target key) from both the source and target modules to the **Consolidation Bus**.

To manage the list of allowed consolidation pairs (source → target operators), it is proposed to add three methods:

`allowPair` — allows consolidation from a source operator to a target operator for a specified consolidation manager address. This method will be called via an EasyTrack motion upon enactment.

`disallowPair` — disallows consolidation from a source operator to a target operator. This method may be called to correct an incorrectly allowed pair, update the consolidation manager address, or stop consolidation for operational reasons. It is proposed to grant the CMC Committee (also known as CM Committee Multisig) permission to call this method.

> `selfDisallowPair` — allows the original submitter to revoke (disallow) a previously allowed pair. Permissionless, but restricted to the submitter of the pair.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`selfDisallowPair` — allows the consolidation manager to revoke (disallow) a previously allowed pair that this manager is responsible for.
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

      uint256 targetValidatorsCount,
      uint256 stuckValidatorsCount,
      uint256 refundedValidatorsCount,
      uint256 stuckPenaltyEndTimestamp,
      uint256 totalExitedValidators,
      uint256 totalDepositedValidators,
      uint256 depositableValidatorsCount
    );
}
```

To validate whether a target key has already been used (deposited), the `getNodeOperatorSummary` method from `IStakingModule` will be used to obtain the total number of deposited validators (`key index < totalDepositedValidators`).

### Consolidation Message Bus

The Message Bus decouples consolidation request submission from execution. This process consists of two steps:

1. Add consolidation requests via the `addConsolidationRequests` method.
2. Execute previously added requests via the `executeConsolidation` method.

Authorized actors (e.g., the Consolidation Migrator) can submit consolidation requests grouped by target key in batches using the `addConsolidationRequests` method:

```
// Add consolidation requests grouped by target key
groups: [
  {
    sourceKeys: [...],   // many sources
    targetKey            // single target
  },
  ...
]
```

The `addConsolidationRequests` method enforces:

> - a batch size limit (maximum number of requests), and

Reviewer 2: Where can I see the proposed limit value?

Author: Under the "Proposed params and roles"  in ConsolidationBus section you can find all suggested parameters.

| Name                      | Value                              | Description                                                 |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| `initialBatchSize`        | `350`                              | Maximum number of consolidation requests per batch          |
| `initialMaxGroupsInBatch` | `10`                               | Maximum number of target validator groups per batch         |
| `initialExecutionDelay`   | `86400` (24 hours)                 | Delay (seconds) between batch publishing and executability  |

- a target validator group limit (maximum number of target validator groups per batch).

It also stores batch hashes along with submission timestamps for deferred execution.

After the execution delay has elapsed, any permissionless executor can process a batch via `executeConsolidation` by submitting:

- the original batch (previously added via `addConsolidationRequests`)
- the required fee

> - `ValidatorWitness` proofs for each target validator

Reviewer 2: Is it required for any batch, or do we need it once per target validator?

Author: Once per target validator in batch. 

Batch usually contains single target validator and  63 source validators (63 consolation request), the proof for target validator will be verified once.

  // 2. Verify the execution delay has passed since the batch was added.
  // 3. Forward the batch to the ConsolidationGateway with ValidatorWitness proofs.
  // 4. Delete the batch from the pending queue.
  // 5. Emit RequestsExecuted event.
  function executeConsolidation(IConsolidationGateway.ConsolidationWitnessGroup[] calldata groups) external payable;
}
```

#### Execution delay

It is proposed that consolidation request execution can only be processed after an execution delay interval, which can be configured via the `setExecutionDelay` method.

This execution delay ensures that honest Council members have sufficient time to pause the DSM and thereby block the execution of new consolidation requests (the Consolidation Gateway checks that the DSM is not paused) in case keys with invalid withdrawal credentials were deposited.

#### Executor Bot

It is proposed that anyone can permissionlessly execute a consolidation batch by calling `executeConsolidation` method with the same batch which was originally added by authorized actors via `addConsolidationRequests`, along with the required fee and `ValidatorWitness` proofs for each target validator.

> A new Consolidation Executor bot is expected to be designed to monitor the Consolidation Bus and execute consolidation request batches sequentially, in the order in which they were initially submitted to the Consolidation Message Bus contract.

Reviewer 2: I think this is not how the bot operates now. I def saw batches being executed not in the original order

Author: Good catch, we removed that strict requirement. Text will be updated, thanks.

  function withdrawDepositableEther(uint256 _amount, uint256 _seedDepositsCount) external;
}
```

As part of the pull model transition, the following deposit-related members are proposed to be removed from the Lido contract:

- `deposit(uint256 _maxDepositsCount, uint256 _stakingModuleId, bytes _depositCalldata)` — the old push-model deposit method.
- The `IStakingRouter.getStakingModuleMaxDepositsCount()` interface usage — Lido would no longer need to determine per-module deposit allocation, as the Staking Router would handle this independently under the pull model.

#### Staking Router

To support switching the deposit flow from a push model to a pull model, it is proposed to introduce a new `receiveDepositableEther` method for receiving ETH from Lido. The `receiveDepositableEther` method can receive ETH only from Lido.

```solidity
interface IStakingRouter {
  /**
   * @notice A payable function for depositable ether acquisition. Can be called only by `Lido`.
   */
  function receiveDepositableEther() external payable;
}
```

It is proposed that deposit flows adopt the new pull-based ETH model. These flows are covered in detail in the following Deposits sections.

> ### Predeposits flow description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Predeposit flow
```

Author: Updated.

A _predeposit_ refers to the initial 32 ETH deposit made to activate a validator.

For withdrawal credentials of type `0x01`, 32 ETH is both the minimum and the maximum effective balance for activation, so the predeposit constitutes the full deposit.

For withdrawal credentials of type `0x02`, the initial 32 ETH deposit is used to activate the validator, while any additional balance may be deposited later, if applicable.

**Note.** A 32 ETH deposit is suggested because it is the minimum effective balance needed for validator activation. Deposits below this threshold do not activate a validator and therefore do not accrue rewards until the total deposited amount reaches at least 32 ETH.

![Predeposits flow](./assets/lip-35/predeposits_flow.png)

1. **The Depositor Bot** collects guardian signatures and initiates the deposit transaction.
2. **The DepositSecurityModule** verifies the guardian signatures and checks the deposit distance. If everything is valid, it calls `StakingRouter.deposit`.

> 3. **The StakingRouter** performs deposits. As part of this process, the Staking Router:

Reviewer 2: It is not clear that the deposit batch can go to a single module in a single TX

Author: Text updated and link to the selection algorithm added.

   - Calculates how much of Lido’s available ETH should be allocated to each staking module.
   - Obtains deposit keys from the staking module.
   - Pulls from Lido the total amount of ETH required to execute deposits for the received keys.
   - Submits a 32 ETH deposit for each key.

> ### Top-ups flow description

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Top-up flow
```

Author: Updated

As in the initial predeposit flow, the Staking Router will deposit 32 ETH for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys. To support reaching the maximum effective balance for `0x02` keys, it is proposed to add Merkle-proof–based top-ups via a separate flow. This adds security by reducing trust assumptions and avoids complicating the validator-creation logic. Top-ups are allowed only for modules that support creation of `0x02` keys.

![Top-up flow](./assets/lip-35/topup_flow.png)

> 1. The Depositor Bot selects validators according to the algorithm described in the [Depositor Bot](#depositor-bot) section and calls `TopUpGateway.topUp`, providing staking module data (module ID, key indices, operator IDs), Merkle proofs, and validator consensus-layer (CL) data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The Depositor Bot selects validators according to the algorithm described in the [Depositor Bot](#depositor-bot) section and calls `TopUpGateway.topUp`, providing staking module data (module ID, key indices, operator IDs), and Merkle proofs of validator consensus-layer (CL) data.
```

Author: Nice! Updated, thanks.

3. The `StakingRouter` executes the top-ups:
   - The Staking Router verifies that top-ups are allowed for the module (i.e., the module uses withdrawal credentials of type `0x02`).
   - It determines how much ETH can be allocated to the module.
   - It calls `allocateDeposits` on the staking module with the module’s maximum deposit amount and the keys’ data, and receives the exact top-up amount for each key. The sum of all top-up amounts must be less than or equal to the module’s maximum deposit amount.
   - The Staking Router pulls from Lido the total ETH amount equal to the sum of all top-up amounts returned by the staking module.
   - The Staking Router then executes the top-ups for each key.
   - After all keys have been deposited, the Staking Router performs a sanity check to ensure that the entire amount of ETH requested from Lido has been deposited.

### Depositor Bot

> The on-chain **min-first allocation strategy** defines how stake is distributed across modules. The depositor bot can not deposit more stake into any module than allowed by the allocation strategy.

Reviewer 2: Link to min-first algo in Lido docs?

Author: Added 👍

    /// @notice Returns new deposits allocation after distributing `_depositAmount`.
    /// @param _depositAmount The maximum ETH amount to allocate.
    /// @param _isTopUp Whether the allocation is for top-ups (true) or predeposits (false).
    /// @return totalAllocated The total amount actually allocated
    /// @return allocated Array of allocated amounts per module
    /// @return newAllocations Array of resulting allocation balances per module
    function getDepositAllocations(uint256 _depositAmount, bool _isTopUp)
        external
        view
        returns (
            uint256 totalAllocated,
            uint256[] memory allocated,
            uint256[] memory newAllocations
        );
}
```

#### Example Setup

Assume the system contains four modules:

| Module | Type (0x01/0x02) | Balance (ETH) |
| ------ | ---------------- | ------------- |
| A      | 0x02             | 100,000       |
| B      | 0x02             | 10,000        |
| C      | 0x01             | 100,000       |
| D      | 0x01             | 10,000        |

The bot runs every 25 blocks. On each run, the bot executes a **two-stage algorithm**:

1. **Stage 1** — Predeposits to modules with `0x02` keys

> 2. **Stage 2** — Top-ups for `0x02` modules or full 32 ETH deposits for `0x01` modules

Reviewer 2: Add a note that if top-ups are disabled on the depositor bot level it should also deposit to `0x01` modules

Author: Added

  /// @param _depositCalldata Staking module calldata.
  /// @dev Only the DepositSecurityModule is allowed to call this method.
  function deposit(uint256 _stakingModuleId, bytes calldata _depositCalldata) external;

  /// @notice Method performs top-up calls to the official Deposit contract. Determines how much Lido buffered ether can be deposited
  /// to the staking module, obtains keys from the staking module with exact allocation for each key, pulls ether from Lido,
  /// and performs the top-up call.
  /// @param _stakingModuleId Id of the staking module to be deposited.
  /// @param _keyIndices List of keys' indices
  /// @param _operatorIds List of operator indices
  /// @param _pubkeys List of public keys
  /// @param _topUpLimits Maximum amount (in wei) that can be deposited per key based on CL data and TopUpGateway logic.
  /// @dev Only the TopUpGateway is allowed to call this method.
  function topUp(
    uint256 _stakingModuleId,
    uint256[] calldata _keyIndices,
    uint256[] calldata _operatorIds,
    bytes[] calldata _pubkeys,
    uint256[] calldata _topUpLimits
  ) external;
}
```

#### Staking Router Configuration

> It is proposed to add a new `withdrawalCredentialsType` property to the module configuration in the `StakingRouter`. This property would distinguish modules that use `0x01` withdrawal credentials from modules that use `0x02` withdrawal credentials and support top-ups up to 2,048 ETH.

Reviewer 2: Have we fixed the getter for WC? It should accept module ID now and return correct value

Author: Yes we have a `getStakingModuleWithdrawalCredentials` method. 
I added description.

- The existing `maxValidatorExitRequestsPerReport` limit will be replaced with a balance-based limit, `maxBalanceExitRequestedPerReportInEth`.
- To preserve the current safety threshold, `maxBalanceExitRequestedPerReportInEth` should be set to **19,200 ETH**, equivalent to the previous cap of `600 validators × 32 ETH`.

Under the new logic, each VEBO report will be validated as follows:

- For modules with **`0x01`-type keys**, multiply the number of validators in the report that belong to this module by **32 ETH**.
- For modules with **`0x02`-type keys**, multiply the number of validators in the report that belong to this module by **2048 ETH**.
- Sum the resulting values across all modules and compare the total against the configured **ETH-denominated sanity-check limit**.

This approach establishes a conservative upper bound on withdrawal volume per report and ensures that VEBO cannot trigger an excessively large withdrawal in a single submission, thereby reducing protocol risk.

### Off-chain Validators Exit Oracle

It is proposed to update the Validators Exit Oracle off-chain logic to correctly support:

> - MaxEB

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `0x02` validator type
```

Author: updated, thanks.

The [Meta Registry](https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/blob/develop/LIPS/lip-33.md#meta-operators-registry) stores information about the explicit relationship between CMv1 module operators and their corresponding operators in the CMv2 module. As a result, when selecting validators to exit from the CMv1 module, the Validators Exit Oracle will be able to take into account the amount of stake already migrated by operators to the CMv2 module.

#### Operator weight in the CSMv2 module

For withdrawals, Validators Exit Oracle must be able to determine from which modules and from which operators stake should be withdrawn.

At the **module level**, Validators Exit Oracle continues to rely on the existing exit share limit.

At the **operator level**, withdrawals depend on the stake allocation strategy used by the module. Currently, two types of withdrawal strategies are in use:

- **Operator-weight–based withdrawals** (CMv2)
- **Largest operator withdrawals** (CMv1, CSM, SDVT)

> The existing largest operator withdrawal strategy does not require any additional data. However, to support operator-weight–based withdrawals, it is proposed to add a `getOperatorWeights` method to the module interface. This method returns operator weights from the CMv2 on-chain allocation strategy.

Reviewer 2: VEBO also accounts for the corresponding operator weight in CMv2 when exiting from CMv1

Reviewer 2: This comment relates to the line above

Author: Thanks, VEBO description updated.

## Motivation

Staking Router v3 is the foundational infrastructure upgrade that serves as the base layer upon which [LIP-33 (CSM v3 and CM v2)](lip-33.md) is built. It unlocks a more flexible and efficient protocol, both technically and operationally. With these changes, the protocol will be able to reallocate stake between modules via consolidation operations, support new deposits into large validators, naturally streamlining the network, and lay the groundwork for smarter, leaner validator management overall.

**A new, `0x02`-ready, accounting model.** Although already supported by the stVaults architecture, this is a fundamental shift for Lido Core. Currently, the Lido protocol handles critical aspects of validator accounting — deposits, rewards, withdrawals — through a unit-based approach where 1 validator equals 32 ETH. A balance-based accounting model is essential for supporting large validators and consolidations because it allows the protocol to treat validators as flexible balances rather than fixed units, enabling seamless consolidation and validator top-ups. For this to happen, a significant rework of several key components of the on-chain protocol is required.

> **Stake migration from CMv1 to CMv2.** The consolidation process would provide a secure and transparent way to quickly migrate stake from the old Curated Module v1 to the new Curated Module v2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Stake migration from CMv1 to CMv2.** The consolidation process would provide a secure and transparent way to quickly migrate stake from the old Curated Module v1 to the new Curated Module v2 with minimal stake inefficiency.
```

Reviewer: ++

Author: Nice! Updated, thanks!

**Deposit reserve for reliable stake rebalancing.** Historically, stake rebalancing between modules through new deposits and withdrawals has been slow and unreliable — SDVT took over 1.5 years to reach its target share. A deposit reserve mechanism guarantees ETH availability for migration deposits and new module onboarding, regardless of withdrawal demand.

# Specification

## Glossary

> - **MaxEB** — Maximum Effective Balance. Introduced by [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251), it raises a validator's effective balance ceiling from 32 ETH up to 2048 ETH.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **MaxEB** — Maximum Effective Balance. Updated by [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251), it raises a validator's effective balance ceiling from 32 ETH up to 2048 ETH for validators with `0x02` withdrawal credentials. 
```

Reviewer: ++

Author: Updated, thanks.

- **WC** — Withdrawal Credentials. The 32-byte field on a validator that determines where its stake exits to and which key type it uses. All Lido core validators use credentials pointing to the `WithdrawalVault` contract.

> - **`0x01` / `0x02` keys** — validator key types, distinguished by withdrawal credentials prefix. `0x01` keys are capped at 32 ETH effective balance; `0x02` keys support MaxEB up to 2048 ETH and allow top-ups and consolidations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`0x01` / `0x02` keys** — validator key types, distinguished by withdrawal credentials prefix. `0x01` keys are capped at 32 ETH effective balance; `0x02` keys support effective balance up to 2048 ETH (MaxEB) and allow top-ups and consolidations.
```

Author: Updated, thanks!

> - **Predeposit** — the initial 32 ETH deposit that activates a validator. Required for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Predeposit** — the minimal deposit (32 ETH) required to activate a validator. Required for both `0x01` and `0x02` keys.
```

Reviewer: ++

Author: Text updated, thanks.

- **Top-up** — an additional deposit to an already-activated `0x02` validator, raising its balance toward the 2048 ETH cap.
- **Consolidation** — an [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) operation that merges a source validator's balance into a target `0x02` validator.

> - **CMv1 / CMv2** — Curated Module v1 (the existing currated module) and Curated Module v2 (the new сurated module receiving consolidated stake).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **CMv1 / CMv2** — Curated Module v1 (the existing curated module with 0x01 withdrawal credentials) and Curated Module v2 (the new сurated module with 0x02 withdrawal credentials).
```

Author: Applied, thanks!

- **CSM** — Community Staking Module, Lido's permissionless staking module.
- **SDVT** — Simple DVT module, the staking module that runs distributed validators.
- **Deposit Reserve** — a portion of Lido's buffered ether protected from withdrawal demand and reserved for CL deposits, ensuring stake rebalancing and migration deposits are not blocked.
- **AO** — Accounting Oracle. The oracle that reports validator balances, rewards, and other accounting data to the protocol.
- **VEBO** — Validators Exit Bus Oracle. The oracle that publishes validator exit requests.

> - **VEO** — Validators Exit Oracle. The off-chain logic that selects which validators to exit; updated here for MaxEB, deposit reserve, and consolidation awareness.

Reviewer 2: These 2 are a bit strange. Isn't it the same thing?

Reviewer: yeah, we already have VEBO, VEB, and now VEO? 🤔 feels a bit too much abbreviations

Author: I wanted to emphasize the difference between the on-chain and off-chain code for the Validators Exit Bus Oracle, but on a second look it indeed felt too cumbersome. I updated the text and removed the unnecessary abbreviation.

> - **DSM** — Deposit Security Module. The contract that gates Lido initial 32 ETH deposit that activates a validator and can be paused by Council guardians.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DSM** — Deposit Security Module. The contract and a distributed off-chain service that gates Lido initial 32 ETH deposit that activates a validator and can be paused by Council guardians.
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

- **TWG** — TriggerableWithdrawalGateway. The contract that submits [EIP-7002](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7002) triggerable withdrawal requests on behalf of the protocol.

## Accounting

### The 32 ETH Problem

Before the Pectra upgrade, every Ethereum validator had a fixed effective balance — 32 ETH. This allowed Lido to use a simple accounting model: it was enough to count the number of validators and multiply by 32 to get the total stake.

[EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) (MaxEB) changed the rules. Now, a validator’s effective balance can range from 32 to 2048 ETH. A validator with 2048 ETH generates 64 times more rewards than a validator with 32 ETH, but the old system treated them equally.

As a result, the current validator-count–based accounting is incompatible with large validators in several aspects:

- **Rewards calculation** — the protocol doesn’t know how much ETH is actually working on the Consensus Layer
- **Stake distribution** — allocation between modules is based on validator count, not actual balance

> - **Tracking totalPooledEther** — the key metric for stETH rate calculation becomes inaccurate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Tracking `totalPooledEther`** — the key metric for stETH rate calculation becomes inaccurate
```

Author: Applied thanks!

It is proposed to replace `clBalance` and `clValidators` in Lido with `clValidatorsBalance` and `clPendingBalance`. The oracle report structure changes accordingly — instead of total balance, it now delivers balances split by state.

#### Accounting oracle report changes

```diff
- clBalanceGwei
+ clValidatorsBalanceGwei
+ clPendingBalanceGwei
+ stakingModuleIdsWithUpdatedBalance[]
+ validatorBalancesGweiByStakingModule[]
```

Total protocol balance on the CL:

```
totalClBalance = clValidatorsBalance + clPendingBalance
```

> Note: For the `clValidatorsBalanceGwei` and `clPendingBalanceGwei` calculations, the oracle uses KAPI. When querying KAPI, the oracle verifies that the returned data corresponds to a slot greater than `refSlot`, ensuring that the response includes the most up-to-date state.

#### CL Validators Balance Calculation Algorithm

1. **Data retrieval:** get the active validator set (with balances) from the Consensus Layer, and the list of Lido keys from the Keys API.

> 2. **Consistency check:** the number of Lido keys returned by the Keys API must be at least equal to the count of deposited validators reported by the Staking Router. If fewer keys are returned, revert.

Reviewer: is it possible to report more keys though?

Author: I think yes, when querying KAPI, the oracle verifies that the returned data corresponds to a slot greater than `refSlot`, so the KAPI response can contains more keys. @F4ever correct me please if I wrong.

Reviewer 5: Correct

3. **Find Lido keys awaiting activation:** compare Lido keys against the CL validator set — keys not yet present on the CL are considered _pending_ (deposited on the Execution Layer, not yet activated on the Consensus Layer).
4. **Attribute deposits to pending keys:** walk pending deposits in queue order; for each deposit targeting a Lido pending key:
   - Deposits with an invalid BLS signature are skipped.
   - The first BLS-valid deposit for a key determines the key’s status: if it points to Lido withdrawal credentials, the key is accepted and the deposit is kept; otherwise the key is considered front-run and all of its deposits are discarded.
   - Subsequent deposits to an already-accepted key are added to that key's group.
5. **Sum balances:** `clPendingBalance` is the sum of deposit amounts across all deposits attributed to accepted pending Lido keys.

### From Transient to Pending

**Currently**, there is a “transient balance” — a virtual value compensating for the delay between sending a deposit and its appearance on the Consensus Layer:

```

> transientBalance = (depositedValidators - clValidators) × 32 ETH

Reviewer: it's already a bit different tho after external shares were introduced with Lido V3 (and now we have fractioinal balances)

<img width="708" height="988" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/54a14364-e87e-4e70-b6ab-628c9c663b65" />

```

> This construct was necessary because a deposit could “hang” between the Execution Layer and the Consensus Layer for several hours or even days. The oracle didn’t see these funds, but the protocol had to account for them in `totalPooledEther`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This construct was necessary because a deposit could “temporary disapear” between the Execution Layer and the Consensus Layer for several hours or even days. The oracle didn’t see these funds, but the protocol had to account for them in `totalPooledEther`.
```

Author: Applied thanks.

> **Proposed:** Pectra ([EIP-6110](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6110)) eliminates this problem. Deposits from the Execution Layer enter the Consensus Layer pending queue in the same block:

Reviewer 2: Note that it will change in Gloas. Not for this LIP, but in general

Author: Noted. Thanks!

> “Validator deposits list supplied in a block is obtained by parsing deposit contract log events emitted by each deposit transaction included in a given block.” — [EIP-6110](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6110)

The oracle always sees the complete picture: active validators in `clValidatorsBalance`, pending deposits in `clPendingBalance`. Transient balance is no longer needed — this simplifies the system and eliminates a potential source of discrepancies between the actual CL state and protocol data.

### Deposit Tracking

> All deposits made after the accounting report reference slot were not included in the accounting report and therefore must be accounted for separately.

Reviewer: Not sure about what this phrase means tbh

Author: I will add more context to make it clear.

Original:
`All deposits made after the accounting report reference slot were not included in the accounting report and therefore must be accounted for separately.`

Updated:
`Each accounting report only covers deposits made up to its reference slot. Any deposits made after that slot are not yet in the report, so the protocol should track them on its own until the next report picks them up.`

**Currently**, deposits are tracked through validator counters. When ETH moves from the buffer to the Deposit Contract:

```diff
- buffered -= 32 ETH
- depositedValidators += 1
```

The transient balance `(depositedValidators - clValidators) × 32 ETH` compensates for deposits in transit.

**Proposed:** deposits are tracked through balance using two counters. When ETH moves from the buffer to the Deposit Contract:

```diff
+ buffered -= amount
+ depositedSinceLastReport += amount
+ depositedForCurrentReport += amount
```

Where:

- `depositedSinceLastReport` — total deposits since the last oracle report reference slot across all frames (includes deposits made after the current reporting frame)

> - `depositedForCurrentReport` — deposits that occurred between the last report reference slot and the current frame's reference slot (i.e., deposits the oracle should have observed; excludes deposits made after the current reporting frame)

Reviewer: it reads a bit weird that we name variables mentioning `*Report`, but in essence refer to ref slots and frames

Author: We picked names that say what the numbers mean ("deposits since the last report" / "deposits for the next report") instead of names tied to inner parts like refSlot, frame, or nonce, so users of this function don't have to know how the oracle works, and the names still make sense if we change how it works later.

```
                                                               NOW
                     ┌─ depositedSinceLastReport ────────────┐ ↓
                     │─ depositedForCurrentReport ─┐         │
      │○○○○○○○○○○○○○○│○●●○○R○○○●○○●○│○○●●●○○●○●○○○○│○○●●○○●○○●○○○○│
      ┆         lastReport-↑       currentRefSlot-↑└────⁠┬────┘
      ┆              ┆ currentReportFrame-↓        ┆    └depositedNextReport
      ⁠║   frame X    ⁠║   frame X+1  ⁠║   frame X+2  ⁠║   frame X+3  ⁠║

       R - report transaction slot
       ● - slot with deposits
       ○ - empty slot
       ⁠║ - frame refSlot
```

The new `getBalanceStats()` method provides full balance model data:

```solidity
interface ILido {
  /// @notice Returns current balance statistics
  /// @return clValidatorsBalanceAtLastReport Sum of validator's active balances in wei
  /// @return clPendingBalanceAtLastReport Sum of validator's pending deposits in wei
  /// @return depositedSinceLastReport Deposits made since last oracle report reference slot

>   /// @return depositedForCurrentReport Deposits made between the last oracle report reference slot  and the current frame's reference slot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /// @return depositedForCurrentReport Deposits made between the last oracle report reference slot and the current frame's reference slot
```

Author: Updated, thanks.

### Migration

The migration aims to preserve data integrity and ensure correct rewards calculation in the first report after the upgrade.

#### Lido Migration

```diff
  depositedValidators
+ clValidatorsBalance
+ clPendingBalance
- clBalance
- clValidators
```

**Current state:** a single packed storage slot containing `clBalance` and `clValidators`.

**Target state:** a single packed storage slot containing `clValidatorsBalance` and `clPendingBalance`.

**Migration procedure:**

1. Read legacy state:
   - `clBalance`
   - `clValidators`
   - `depositedValidators`
2. Compute the transient balance as
   `transientBalance = (depositedValidators − clValidators) × 32 ETH`.
3. Populate the new state:
   - `clValidatorsBalance = clBalance`
   - `clPendingBalance = transientBalance`

The transient balance becomes the pending balance — semantically, it is the same thing (ETH on the way to activation), but now the oracle will report the actual value instead of a calculated one.

#### StakingRouter Migration

**Before:** modules store only validator counters (`depositedValidatorsCount`, `exitedValidatorsCount`).

> **After:** each module stores `validatorsBalanceGwei`.

Reviewer 2: Just to clarify, SR will ask 0x02 modules about the balance and for 0x01 modules (deposited - exited) * 32 will be used?

If so, we need to reflect that. If not, we need to talk to the modules team about the migration

Author: Yes. For allocation, SR will query 0x02 modules for the balance, while for 0x01 modules, it will use `deposited - exited`.

This section is not related to allocation. It describes accounting and modules reward distribution, which use `validatorsBalanceGwei` reported by the Accounting Oracle.

And the Staking Router description in the Deposits section contains explanation of allocation for `0x01` and `0x0x2` types of modules.

1. **exitedEthAmountPerDayLimit (57,600 ETH)**
   This has been converted to ETH without changes to the underlying logic, but it now accounts for the specific calculation where the minimum possible validator balance is 16 ETH.

2. **consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit (91,800 ETH)**
   This was calculated based on the current state of the network, including deposit queue and a buffer for potential DAO changes over a two-month period (37.3M + 3.2M + 3M).

#### VEBO: Maximum exit ETH per report

`checkMaximumOfAmountEthCalledToExitInReport` verifies the maximum amount of ETH that can be sent within a single VEBO report based on the count of different type cases multiplied by their weights. Under this check, we assume the weight of a `0x02`-type validator falls within the range of 32 to 2048 ETH and can be adjusted based on risk tolerance. Taking all conditions into account, the current value for `maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType02` is set to 2048.

```
count_of_0x01_keys * maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType01 +
+ count_of_0x02_keys * maxEffectiveBalanceWeightWCType02
<= maxBalanceExitRequestedPerReportInEth
```

#### AO: CL balances consistency

> `checkCLBalancesConsistency` performs basic data verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`checkCLBalancesConsistency` performs basic data verification.
```

Author: Applied, thanks.

```
count_of_0x01_keys * 32 + count_of_0x02_keys * 32
<=
(exitedEthAmountPerDayLimit + consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit)*2

OR

(count_of_0x01_keys + count_of_0x02_keys) * 16
<= exitedEthAmountPerDayLimit + consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit
```

### Legacy API

Currently, external services use `Lido.getBeaconStat()`, which returns `depositedValidators`, `beaconValidators`, and `beaconBalance`.

However, `beaconValidators` would no longer reflect the actual consensus layer (CL) state and would always be equal to `depositedValidators`.

It is proposed to **mark `getBeaconStat` as deprecated**.

For new integrations, `getBalanceStats()` is recommended, as it reflects the current accounting model and provides more detailed information about the protocol state.

## Consolidation

![Consolidation flow](./assets/lip-35/consolidation_flow.png)

It is suggested that the first step in the consolidation process is an EasyTrack motion to set consolidation parameters.

> Operators will use EasyTrack to specify a **source/target operator pair** (CMv1 → CMv2), along with a **Consolidation Manager address**—the address that will be granted permission to submit consolidation requests for consolidating validators from the source operator to the target operator. Once the motion is enacted, stake transfers from a CMv1 operator entity to its corresponding CMv2 entity are permitted, allowing the operator to submit consolidation requests to the Migrator contract.

Reviewer: I recall there were discussions about this flow, does it reflect the up-to-date version?

Author: Yes, this flow describe up-to-date version.

Currently, only consolidation from operators in the CMv1 module to operators in the CMv2 module will be allowed. Under the hood, Easy Track validation verifies that the source–target operator pair is registered in the CMv2 meta operators registry, which indicates that the pair is allowed under the migration plan.

A single node operator in the CMv1 module may consolidate into multiple operators in the CMv2 module, and such configurations can be submitted within a single EasyTrack motion.

### Consolidation Migrator

The **Consolidation Migrator** contract validates stake consolidation (migration) requests from a source operator in one module to a target operator in another module. The **source module ID** and **target module ID** are provided at deployment time in the implementation contract and are immutable thereafter.

```
// Consolidation Migrator receive key indexes grouped by target keys
sourceOperatorId
targetOperatorId
groups: [
  {
    sourceKeyIndices: [...], // many sources

>     targetKeyIndex.          // single target

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    targetKeyIndex           // single target
```

Author: updated.

2. Execute previously added requests via the `executeConsolidation` method.

Authorized actors (e.g., the Consolidation Migrator) can submit consolidation requests grouped by target key in batches using the `addConsolidationRequests` method:

```
// Add consolidation requests grouped by target key
groups: [
  {
    sourceKeys: [...],   // many sources
    targetKey            // single target
  },
  ...
]
```

The `addConsolidationRequests` method enforces:

- a batch size limit (maximum number of requests), and
- a target validator group limit (maximum number of target validator groups per batch).

It also stores batch hashes along with submission timestamps for deferred execution.

After the execution delay has elapsed, any permissionless executor can process a batch via `executeConsolidation` by submitting:

- the original batch (previously added via `addConsolidationRequests`)
- the required fee
- `ValidatorWitness` proofs for each target validator

```
// Execute consolidation requests
groups: [
  {
    sourceKeys: [...],
    validatorWitness // contains the original target key and withdrawal credentials (WC) proof
  },
  ...
]
```

> The `addConsolidationRequests` verifies that:

Reviewer: is it about `executeConsolidation` or both?

Author: Great catch. This is about validation in `executeConsolidation`, not `addConsolidationRequests`. I have updated the text.

  function executeConsolidation(IConsolidationGateway.ConsolidationWitnessGroup[] calldata groups) external payable;
}
```

#### Execution delay

It is proposed that consolidation request execution can only be processed after an execution delay interval, which can be configured via the `setExecutionDelay` method.

This execution delay ensures that honest Council members have sufficient time to pause the DSM and thereby block the execution of new consolidation requests (the Consolidation Gateway checks that the DSM is not paused) in case keys with invalid withdrawal credentials were deposited.

#### Executor Bot

It is proposed that anyone can permissionlessly execute a consolidation batch by calling `executeConsolidation` method with the same batch which was originally added by authorized actors via `addConsolidationRequests`, along with the required fee and `ValidatorWitness` proofs for each target validator.

A new Consolidation Executor bot is expected to be designed to monitor the Consolidation Bus and execute consolidation request batches sequentially, in the order in which they were initially submitted to the Consolidation Message Bus contract.

### Consolidation Gateway

> It is proposed to introduce a single entry point for processing consolidation requests. This entry point would be responsible for verifying target validators’ withdrawal credentials, checking consolidation preconditions, enforcing consolidation limits, and enabling the consolidation flow to be paused independently in the event of an emergency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is proposed to introduce a single smart contract entry point for processing consolidation requests. This entry point would be responsible for verifying target validators’ withdrawal credentials, checking consolidation preconditions, enforcing consolidation limits, and enabling the consolidation flow to be paused independently in the event of an emergency.
```

Author: Applied, thanks.

    balance: 100_000
    allocated: 640
```

- If no allocations are available (e.g., no keys remain or all modules exceed their target share), the bot proceeds to Stage 2.

Example:

```
// No allocation available — skip stage
Module B:
    balance: 10_320
    allocated: 0

Module A:
    balance: 100_640
    allocated: 0
```

#### Stage 2. Top-ups to modules with `0x02` keys or deposits to `0x01` modules

At this stage, the bot considers **top-ups** for `0x02` modules (A and B) or **full deposits** for `0x01` modules (C and D)

- If any allocations are available, the bot:
  - Selects the module with the **lowest balance** among those with `allocated > 0`
  - Executes:
    - a **top-up**, if the module is `0x02`, or
    - a **full deposit**, if the module is `0x01`
  - Stops execution

Example:

```
// Modules sorted by balance
// Bot skips modules with allocated = 0 and selects the lowest eligible one

Module D (0x01):  <- skipped (allocated = 0)
    balance: 10_000
    allocated: 0

Module B (0x02):  <- selected
    balance: 10_320
    allocated: 2000

Module C (0x01):
    balance: 100_000
    allocated: 1600

Module A (0x02):
    balance: 100_640
    allocated: 1000
```

> - If no top-ups are allowed for `0x02` modules (e.g., all validators reached MaxEB or allocation is zero), **and** no full deposit are allowed for `0x01` modules (e.g., no available keys or all modules exceed their target share),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If no top-ups are allowed for `0x02` modules (e.g., all validators reached MaxEB or allocation is zero), **and** no full deposits are allowed for `0x01` modules (e.g., no available keys or all modules exceed their target share),
```

Author: applied thanks.

  the bot exits.

Example:

```
// No allocation available — bot exits
Module D:
    balance: 10_000
    allocated: 0

Module B:
    balance: 12_320
    allocated: 0

Module A:
    balance: 101_640
    allocated: 0

Module C:
    balance: 101_600
    allocated: 0
```

#### Depositor Bot top-up flow for `0x02` key modules

When the Depositor Bot needs to top up validators in 0x02 modules, it performs the following steps:

- Selects validators based on the module-specific algorithm described in the section below
- Builds Merkle proofs
- Calls `TopUpGateway.topUp` (a new contract that verifies proofs and calls `topUp` on the Staking Router) with the staking module data (module IDs, key indices, operator IDs), proofs, and validator CL data

#### Top-up key selection for CMv2

> For **CMv2**, the Depositor Bot operates on a per-operator basis and select keys based on following algorithm:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For **CMv2**, the Depositor Bot operates on a per-operator basis and selects keys based on following algorithm:
```

Author: Applied, thnaks.

1. Based on the allocated amount received from the Staking Router’s `getDepositAllocations` function, the Depositor Bot calls `getDepositsAllocation(uint256 depositAmount)` on the module to determine how much stake should be allocated to each operator.
2. Across this list of operators, the Depositor Bot chooses the oldest validators and checks that:

>    - the validator has not exceeded a **2045.75 ETH** balance (this constant is discussed in the [Top-Up Limit Calculation](#top-up-limit-calculation) section) balance (actual + pending);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - the validator has not exceeded a **2045.75 ETH** (this constant is discussed in the [Top-Up Limit Calculation](#top-up-limit-calculation) section) balance (actual + pending);
```

Author: updated.

5. The Depositor Bot calls the `TopUpGateway` with key data (module ID, key indices, operator IDs), proofs, and validator CL data.

#### Top-up key selection for the future `0x02` version of CSM

For the **`0x02` version of CSM**, the module maintains a global internal queue and exposes a **cursor** that always returns the next validator key that must be processed. Unlike CMv2, key selection is module-wide, not per-operator:

1. Based on the allocated amount received from the Staking Router’s `getDepositAllocations` function, the Depositor Bot queries the module cursor via `getKeysForTopUp` to retrieve the next keys to be topped up.
2. For the selected validators, the Depositor Bot builds Merkle proofs:
   - Proof of the `Validator` container on CL
3. For the selected validators, the Depositor Bot calculates pending deposit amounts.
4. The Depositor Bot calls the `TopUpGateway` with key data (module ID, key indices, operator IDs), proofs, and validator CL data.

Because the `0x02` CSM cursor **should never be blocked**, the Depositor Bot **should not skip any validators**, even if one:

- is slashed,
- is marked for exit,

> - has actual + pending balance > 2046.75,

Reviewer: 2045.75?

Author: Even 2048 ETH, this is for CSM 0x02, CSM cursor should never be blocked, no limitation on validator balance, but in consolidation gateway the top-up limit will be zero for such key.

I updated text, to make it clear.

  uint64 withdrawableEpoch;
}

interface ITopUpGateway {
  /// @notice Allows topping up Lido Core validators.
  /// @dev Access-controlled in the implementation (role-based).
  function topUp(TopUpData calldata topUps) external;

  function getLastTopUpTimestamp() external view returns (uint256);
  function getMaxValidatorsPerTopUp() external view returns (uint256);
  function getMinBlockDistance() external view returns (uint256);
  function getMaxRootAge() external view returns (uint256);

  function setMaxValidatorsPerTopUp(uint256 newValue) external;
  function setMinBlockDistance(uint256 newValue) external;
  function setMaxRootAge(uint256 newValue) external;

  function canTopUp(uint256 stakingModuleId) external view returns (bool);
}
```

#### Proof building rules

The slot is taken from a selected beacon header, and the timestamp is taken from the execution block that stored the root of this header in the [EIP-4788](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4788) contract. On-chain verification checks that this timestamp resolves, via EIP-4788, to the corresponding beacon root, and that the Merkle path includes a header node with exactly this `(slot, proposer)`.

> The slot used in the proof must not be older than 5 minutes relative to the current timestamp. This requirement enforces that proofs are generated for **recent** headers, which reduces the probability that the validator has exited between proof construction and top-up execution, while providing sufficient time for an off-chain agent to assemble the proof and the remaining inputs required for the top-up.

Reviewer: it's 600 seconds below ⚠️

Author: Thanks, yes, we decided to increase it to 600 seconds to ensure the Depositor Bot has enough time to collect proofs. We conducted performance tests that showed 5 minutes (300 seconds) might not be enough if the node does not return the state quickly enough.

I will update text, great catch!

- Update the sanity checker to validate the **upper-bound total effective balance** requested to exit based on the key type (`0x01` with a MaxEB of 32 ETH or `0x02` with a MaxEB of 2048 ETH), rather than the raw validator count.

![VEBO flow](./assets/lip-35/vebo_flow.png)

#### Report format

It is proposed to introduce a second VEBO report data format, `DATA_FORMAT_LIST_WITH_KEY_INDEX`, which will include the pubkey, module ID, operator ID, and key index, allowing the key type (`0x01` / `0x02`) to be determined on-chain.

```
/// Current DATA_FORMAT_LIST = 1
/// MSB <------------------------------------------------------- LSB
/// |  3 bytes   |  5 bytes   |     8 bytes      |    48 bytes     |
/// |  moduleId  |  nodeOpId  |  validatorIndex  | validatorPubkey |

/// NEW DATA_FORMAT_LIST_WITH_KEY_INDEX = 2
/// MSB <-------------------------------------------------------------------- LSB
/// |  3 bytes   |  5 bytes   |     8 bytes      |   8 bytes  |    48 bytes     |
/// |  moduleId  |  nodeOpId  |  validatorIndex  |  keyIndex  | validatorPubkey |
```

> It is proposed that oracles submit exit reports using the new `DATA_FORMAT_LIST_WITH_KEY_INDEX` format, enabling the key type (`0x01` / `0x02`) to be determined reliably on-chain.

Reviewer: so the oracles must switch to the new format, I mean we should probably explicitly revert old format report

Author: Correct, VEBO will revert if the oracles attempt to submit a report in the old format.

The old format is still used by EasyTrack for exit requests because EasyTrack already validates that a key belongs to a particular module. Therefore, it was not necessary to update EasyTrack to use the new format. The main reason for introducing the new format was to add validation that a key belongs to the corresponding module.

| Highest deviation from the exit share limit |                                                                               |                        |
|                                             | **Balance of validators for (CMv1, CSM, SDVT) or operator weight for (CMv2)** |                        |
|                                             |                                                                               | Lowest validator index |

## Stake Rebalancing

The current sporadic stake rebalancing between modules via new deposits and withdrawals raises several challenges that are difficult to solve efficiently with existing rebalancing approaches:

- Efficiently rebalance stake between modules; it took SDVT over a year and a half to reach its target share. A future possible CSM share limit increase up to 10% might require significant time.
- Ensure that there is always enough ETH for initial 32 ETH deposits to `0x02`-type keys in the CMv2 module to support stake migration from the CMv1 to the CMv2 module via consolidation.

> To solve these challenges, it is proposed to add a deposit reserve mechanism to protect a portion of the protocol's buffered ether for CL deposits, regardless of withdrawal demand.

Reviewer: Not for the current LIP, but probably for the forum discussion to be ready: what's the napkin math here (e.g. we expect daily  ~600-700 ETH to be available for the buffer and that would slow down withdrawals up to ~X%)

Author: Max M has conducted research regarding the deposit reserve size. I will ask him to prepare the calculations.

### Deposit Reserve

Under current conditions, cycling arbitrage and vampire attacks via withdrawals can result in submitted ether being withdrawn before it is ever deposited. This situation limits the ability to allocate stake to new modules and node operators.

To ensure that there is always enough ETH for stake rebalancing and initial 32 ETH deposits to `0x02`-type keys in the CMv2 module during the migration process, it is proposed to reserve a portion of the protocol's buffered ether for CL deposits, protecting it from being consumed by withdrawal demand.

#### Proposed solution

> 1. Allow the DAO or a delegated entity to set a deposits reserve target (`depositsReserveTarget`) — the amount of buffered ether to protect for CL deposits between accountinng oracle reports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Allow the DAO or a delegated entity to set a deposits reserve target (`depositsReserveTarget`) — the amount of buffered ether to protect for CL deposits between accounting oracle reports.
```

Author: updated, thanks.

- `maxPriorityExitShareDecrease` - allowed absolute decrease of the module's `priorityExitShare` in BP per 1 ET motion

### Algorithm

![Module Shares Easy Track algorithm](./assets/lip-35/module_shares_easytrack_algorithm.png)

1. **Motion is started**
   An ET motion is created with the desired `stakeShareLimit` and `priorityExitShare` values.
2. **Current state is validated**
   The current module parameters are fetched from `StakingRouter`, and it is verified that:
   - Provided `currentXXX` values match the on-chain data
   - Requested changes are within configured limits
3. **Motion enactment is requested**
   The created motion is submitted for enactment via Easy Track.
4. **State is re-checked and changes are applied**
   The current parameters are fetched again to ensure they have not changed during the motion.
   If unchanged, the new values are applied; otherwise, the transaction is reverted.

### Motion creation

The factory accepts the following parameters for motion creation:

```
    uint256 currentStakeShareLimit,
    uint256 newStakeShareLimit,
    uint256 currentPriorityExitShareThreshold,

>     uint256 newPriorityExitShareThreshold

Reviewer: is Threshold suffix needed?

Author: I think no, because the name follow the naming conventions which was introduced in LIP-25. Staking Router 2.0

Author: - stakeShareLimit
- priorityExitShareThreshold

| Role                             | Assignee                      |
| -------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE`             | Aragon Agent                  |
| `PAUSE_ROLE`                     | CircuitBreaker, ResealManager |
| `RESUME_ROLE`                    | ResealManager                 |
| `ADD_CONSOLIDATION_REQUEST_ROLE` | ConsolidationBus              |
| `EXIT_LIMIT_MANAGER_ROLE`        | Not assigned by default       |

Constructor parameters:

| Name                            | Value                                                                | Description                                                   |
| ------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `admin`                         | Aragon Agent (granted via temporary admin after `completeSetup`)     | Receives `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE`                                 |
| `lidoLocator`                   | LidoLocator proxy                                                    | Lido protocol service locator                                 |

> | `maxConsolidationRequestsLimit` | `2900`                                                               | Max consolidation requests accepted before rate-limit applies |

Reviewer: `ConsolidationGateway`: `consolidationsPerFrame = 1`, `frameDurationInSec = 30`, `maxConsolidationRequestsLimit = 2900`. 

That is up to 2,880 consolidations per 24 h at sustained rate (or 2,900 in burst). At MaxEB 2048 ETH per consolidation that is 5,898,240 ETH/day worst-case throughput on the gateway alone.

`OracleReportSanityChecker.consolidationEthAmountPerDayLimit` is 91,800 ETH (across the text) / 93,375 ETH (params table) — i.e. ~45 full-MaxEB consolidations per day.

— 

The asymmetry is large enough that it should be either:
- Tightened in the gateway to the same order of magnitude as the daily sanity limit
OR
- Justified explicitly as "redundant rate-limiting at two layers, sanity-check is the anchor"

Author: In this calculation, you assume consolidation from a 0x02 validator with 2048 ETH, which is not the case. Currently, **only CMv1 (0x01) → CMv2 consolidation will be allowed.**

2,880 consolidations × 32 ETH = 92,160 ETH

The limit is currently designed purely for CMv1-to-CMv2 consolidation purposes.

If 0x02 → 0x02 consolidation is allowed in the future, this limit will be adjusted.

| `gIFirstValidatorPrev`          | `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000096000000000028` | Generalized index for first validator before fork pivot       |
| `gIFirstValidatorCurr`          | `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000096000000000028` | Generalized index for first validator after fork pivot        |
| `pivotSlot`                     | `0`                                                                  | Slot at which the active generalized index switches           |

### ConsolidationGateway CircuitBreaker registration

`ConsolidationGateway` is registered as a pausable contract on the existing [CircuitBreaker](./lip-34.md) instance, with a dedicated pauser committee assigned to it. Pause duration and heartbeat interval are global CircuitBreaker parameters and are not set per registration.

| Name       | Value                    | Description                                                      |
| ---------- | ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `pausable` | `ConsolidationGateway`   | Contract registered as pausable on CircuitBreaker                |

> | `pauser`   | Dedicated multisig (TBD) | Multisig authorized to trigger a pause on `ConsolidationGateway` |

Reviewer: Gate Seal committee?

Author: Text Updated, thanks.

| `ALLOW_PAIR_ROLE`    | EasyTrack EVMScriptExecutor |
| `DISALLOW_PAIR_ROLE` | CMC Committee               |

Constructor parameters (implementation):

| Name               | Value                  | Description                                           |
| ------------------ | ---------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `stakingRouter`    | StakingRouter proxy    | Used to resolve module by id and introspect operators |
| `consolidationBus` | ConsolidationBus proxy | Bus that receives published consolidation batches     |
| `_sourceModuleId`  | `1` (NOR / CMv1)       | Immutable source module ID                            |
| `_targetModuleId`  | `4` (CMv2)             | Immutable target module ID                            |

`initialize(...)` parameters (called on proxy):

| Name    | Value                              | Description                   |
| ------- | ---------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| `admin` | Aragon Agent (via temporary admin) | Receives `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` |

### TopUpGateway

New contract behind `OssifiableProxy`.

| Role                 | Assignee                |

> | -------------------- | ----------------------- |

Reviewer: PAUSE_ROLE and RESUME_ROLE are missing probably (CircuitBreaker relevant)

Reviewer: ConsolidationGateway also has relevant circuit breaker references across the doc

Author: Yes, this section missed updates after the latest decision to make top-up pausable. I will update it, thanks.

| `_gIFirstValidatorPrev` | `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000096000000000028` | Generalized index for first validator before fork pivot |
| `_gIFirstValidatorCurr` | `0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000096000000000028` | Generalized index for first validator after fork pivot  |
| `_pivotSlot`            | `0`                                                                  | Slot at which the active generalized index switches     |
| `_slotsPerEpoch`        | `32`                                                                 | Slots per epoch (from chain spec)                       |

`initialize(...)` parameters (called on proxy):

| Name                     | Value                              | Description                                                                               |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `_admin`                 | Aragon Agent (via temporary admin) | Receives `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE`                                                             |

> | `_maxValidatorsPerTopUp` | `32`                               | Maximum number of validators a single `topUp` can process                                 |

Reviewer: above we said `maxTopUpPerBlock` and `minTopUpDistance`

Author: Clarified with analytics parameters for maxTopUpPerBlock and minTopUpDistance and added them to the lip.

 - maxTopUpPerBlockGwei: 3200 ETH
 - minTopUpDistance: 75 blocks  (15 minutes)

Thanks!

> | `_maxValidatorsPerTopUp` | `32`                               | Maximum number of validators a single `topUp` can process                                 |

Reviewer: above we said `maxTopUpPerBlock` and `minTopUpDistance`

Author: Duplicated, answered here: 
https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/pull/113/changes#r3187046184

> | `_minBlockDistance`      | `1`                                | Minimum block distance between `topUp` calls                                              |

Reviewer: hmm, we say bot runs every 25 blocks

Author: _minBlockDistance updated.

> | `_maxRootAgeSec`         | `600`                              | Maximum age (seconds) of the beacon root used to prove validator state                    |

Reviewer: it's 5 minutes above

Author: fixed, we decided to use 600 sec, to make sure that bot has enough time for proofs collections.

> | `_targetBalanceGwei`     | `2046750000000` (2046.75 ETH)      | Validator target balance ceiling after top-up (leaves 1.25 ETH safety margin below MaxEB) |

Reviewer: we have other constant above: 2045.75

Author: `_targetBalanceGwei` is correctly set to `2046.75 ETH` (`MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE − TOP_UP_SAFETY_MARGIN`). The `2045.75` constant contained an obsolete value. I removed the hardcoded value and replaced it with the formula and a link to the explanation. 

Thanks for noticing this.
